Routing algorithms in networks with the topology of circulant graphs
The thesis "Routing algorithms in networks with the topology of 
circulant graphs" investigates topological properties of circulant 
graphs and their application to computer data exchange.

Circulant graphs are undirected vertex transitive graphs with n vertices 
and edges of length hi, (i=1, 2, ..., k). When selecting an appropriate 
topology for a computer network, circulant graphs represent an 
intermediate choice between simple but unreliable ring topology and 
reliable but expensive (and sometimes technologically unfeasible) fully 
connected topology. Due to their favorable properties--among which are 
symmetry, scalability, reliability, small diameter, and small average 
node distance,--circulant graphs are widely studied as suitable 
topologies for local area networks and parallel computer architectures. 
They have been efficiently used in ILLIAC IV, FDDI-token, SILK and SONET 
rings, Intel Paragon, Cray T3D, MPP, and MICROS.

Routing algorithms are used to solve data exchange problems in computer 
networks. Data (i.e. a message) is split into several packages. The task 
of a routing algorithm is to transfer the packages along the network 
edges to their final destination and then to combine them into original 
message. There are two types of routing algorithms. Static routing 
algorithms determine the path for each packet in the preprocessing phase 
(i.e. before the actual start of routing); dynamic routing algorithms 
perform all the necccessary routing calculations on-the-fly. After the 
preprocessing phase the routing algorithm makes several successive 
routing steps. In each routing step the algorithm can move a packet from 
its current node to one of the neighboring nodes. Routing algorithms can 
be used to solve various routing problems. A two-terminal routing is a 
problem where only one package has to be routed from its source to its 
final destination. Routing algorithms for this problem aim to route a 
package along one of its shortest paths. Much more complicated situation 
occurs when more than one package is present in the network. In this 
case, which is also known as the general routing problem, a routing 
algorithm tries to route all the packages to their final destination in 
as few as possible routing steps.

In this thesis we first introduce the wide area of our work. We 
extensively explain the meaning of the following terms: network, routing 
model, routing problem, routing algorithm. We also present the criteria 
for measuring the quality of a given routing algorithm. In the following 
there are two main chapters. The first one is dedicated to the selected 
topology (i.e. circulant graphs) and the second one to the routing 
algorithms designed and tested for this topology.

In the chapter dedicated to circulant graphs we first summarize the 
known results and the most important topological properties. Then we 
present a method for solving certain problems (such as calculating the 
diameter and calculating the shortest paths) by reduction to integer 
lattice in which a point represents a walk in a graph. We introduce the 
notion of minimal projection and give the corresponding algorithm to 
construct it. We present the integer lattice as a module, define the 
notion of packed basis, and present two algorithms for calculating it. 
Then we introduce and prove several important features concerning 
vectors of packed basis. We also introduce a new topology, the so called 
semi-directed circulant graphs, and present an O(log n) algorithm for 
calculating the shortest paths between nodes in these graphs. The proof 
of correctness for this algorithm, which calculates the shortest paths 
by using the minimal projection along the vectors of packed basis, is 
based on the properties of packed basis proved in earlier sections. We 
also present some k-generalizations of the algorithms presented for 
2-circulant graphs.

In the chapter on the routing in circulant graphs we first present two 
routing algorithms for the two-terminal routing problem (static and 
dynamic version). Then we present a parameterized model used to describe 
routing algorithms and give five parameter-sets of five static routing 
algorithms for the general routing problem. We also describe a dynamic 
algorithm for the general routing problem and compare the efficiency of 
this algorithm with the best static one. At the end of the chapter we 
present a generalization of a routing algorithm for general k-circulant 
graphs.

In the last chapter of the thesis we give some open questions and ideas 
for future work.
