An Optimum Business model for autoparts Manufacturing  Industry In Taiwan- A case study for A compony
abstractFactory Management achievements is always the importance of view for company conductor and the shareholder. However, achieves the company’s wish, increase the business efficiency, enhance the high production ability, reduce waste and cost, promote the product competition. Furthermore, adjust the business direction and strategy; keep the company with long-term stability of safety. Competitions development of traditional industry is become globalization occupy the position in the variable market, only precisely、fast and effectively、 ” Create NEW “ mode. 
The plan and execute for a manufacturing strategy should be conducted by the implement of policy. Hence, the decision of manufacturing policies which are very important, enterprise management such as: selection of equipment、human skill quality level、material arrangement、manufacturing management、location of plant…,etc. The suitable control on whole resource arrangements and applications, and this has caused the production capability changes, these should be very carefull.
The primary of this study discussed enterprise manufacturing strategy and involved management performance. Focus on Auto Parts Manufacturing Industry as a research object, and proceeding empirical analysis.Manufacturing policy imply the ratio of The factory layout and The choice of factory location、The decision of production capability、The process technique、The ability of employee、The production plan and raw material controlling、The decision of quality、Supplier management ..., etc; starting the analysis contains 7 composed portions. 
Advantage competition inclusive of on delivery time、quality、flexible (Create New)、cost…,etc. Starting the analysis contains 4 composed portions on each period and competitor performance. Management performance of a company takes Profit-Ability as a key Performance index. (Gross Margin rate、Business Profit、Net income after tax、Return on Assets、Book Value Per Share、PS-Operating Income、PS-Net income after tax)Liquidation ability (Current Ratio、Quick Ratio、Liability ratio、Interest cover) Management Journal (Sales Growth Rate、Total asset growth rate、Fixed asset growth rate、Equity Growth Rate) Management ability (Average inventory turnover rate、Receivables turnover rate、Total Assets Turnover Rate)
The method of this study researches the relation between enterprise manufacturing strategy and management performance. Take Taiwan Auto Parts Manufacturing Industry as the example, dopt “A corporation” as a discussion target and find out the best researchable. Gather the information before demonstrate. Defined enterprise manufacturer strategy and management performance, aimed at current industry situation、industry characteristic、industry rights association、Relations of Auto Parts Manufacturing Industry’ s manufacturing strategy and 
company performance. Establish manufacturing strategy、manufacturing decision、advantage competition、and concluded the optimum model for the company performance.
The findings showed that the intermixed management of AM and OEM which the benefit is not clear, the reason is as follows:
              
1.、The factory layout and The choice of factory location、
2.、The decision of production capability、
3.、The process technique、
4.、The ability of employee、
5.、The production plan and raw material controlling、
6.、The decision of quality、
7.、Supplier management 。
  From the above reason correlation, affected on delivery time, the quality, the cost, the flexible change, appears on the recent five year index of correlation. Finally causes the management performance, profit ability, business capacity, and the liquidation ability not to be good. 
Take “A Corporation” of business optimum model suggestion as the example: 
1. AM and OEM in approximate 5:5, possessed the economical scale, and then management separated. 
2. The best scale commeted below the approximately 300 people / factory, the proportion of indirect personnel and the direct personnel approximate 1:4, this can reduce the managed cost.
3. AM Proportion of outsourcing and self-made should 7:3, OEM Proportion of outsourcing and self-made should be 5:5, be supposed to reduce the asset investments, and raises the equipment operation rate, shares the investment risk.
4. The proportion of material cost and the processing cost should 5:5, and reduces the inventory cost.
