Research on the Financing Problems of Taiwanese Firms Investing in Mainland China
abstractDuring the process of economic development, Taiwan’s Investment in mainland China has gradually changed from traditional labor-intensive consumer industries to high-tech industries such as electronics and semi-conductor. These capital-intensive technological industries all have financing problem while making investments in China due to cross-strait policy restrictions and China’s dilapidated banking practices. China’s outdated banking industries were unable to improve their financial services to develop new product to satisfy much-needed financial demand from the fast-developing private sectors and, thus, creating financing difficulties for Taiwanese firms in China.
The financing sources for Taiwan subsidiaries in China are mainly from their parent companies. Taiwanese subsidiaries’ high dependence on parent company for financing forced parent company to continue to use home bank-financing which influenced unfavorably their parent-subsidiary operating financing and created worries that the problem of capital outflow into china went out of control.
In order to correct this problem, Taiwan subsidiary firms in China should be allowed to obtain financing or to raise fund locally to overcome the difficulties of cross-strait financing.
Taiwan’s business communities have often criticized and recommended the Government to liberalize investment restrictions and allow Taiwan’s banking sectors to set up branch offices in China to provide financial services to Taiwanese business. China, however, still restricted Taiwanese and Foreign banks to operate local RMB financing business. After both Taiwan and China joined WTO, the problem might be corrected and national treatment on the financial industries be provided to Taiwanese as well as foreign banking industries.
This paper studies the financing problem of Taiwanese firms in China. Taiwanese firms’ use of home debt financing from the bank to invest in China has created high degree of worry from Taiwanese government as well as home banking communities.  As a result, Taiwan’s Central bank have asked its commercial banks to pay special attention to financing risks in China and indicated to these commercial bank to report detail account information regarding firms’ fund remittance into China.
On the other hand, local Chinese banks possess RMB depository resources to operate local currency guarantee loans, and become one of the ideal financing sources for Taiwanese firms. Foreign banks have the advantage in trade remittance and financing since they own branches across strait. As a result, Taiwanese firms’ financing strategy should focus on bank selection based on individual bank’s characteristics, historical background, fund-management capability, and build up firm-bank trust relationship with their debt-repayment capability to obtain local financing through private banking channels. Taiwanese firms should use portions of their operating capital to establish local banking relationship, use their long-term good will and business reputation to obtain local financing.
With Taiwan’s huge investment in China, Taiwan firms are scattered through out everywhere in China. These firms strive to continue their hard-working tradition and contributed significantly to cross-strait economic development. This study recommends that Taiwan government extends loan guarantee to Taiwanese firms in China and provide financial services to help Taiwanese firms to raise fund and to be listed in China’s stock market so that the financing problem may be resolved and a cross-strait win-win result may be achieved by Taiwanese firms in China.
