Analysis and Research of VOCS in Industrial Wastewater in High-tech
abstractIn recent years, the domestic industrial form has changed into the high-tech industry gradually and many science parks are flourishing. But pollution problems come with these developments so that pollution problems brought by the high-tech industry have become the great task of the environment conservation. The organic solvents used by the high-tech industry are various and complex and they are usually not used by the traditional industry because the process of the high-tech industry changes quickly and the new process is of business confidentiality. Therefore, the ingredient of most organic solvents even cannot be identified clearly and many organic solvents even cannot be transpired by common inspection means.
This research takes a certain science park as the background. At the beginning of this research, study the status of organic raw materials used at present in this science park by selecting correlative information offered before setting up factories, including setup of the fixed pollution source, operation license, approval for the proposal of measures for water pollution prevention and cure, waste treatment proposal, pollution prevention proposal, etc. Then, probe into the organic raw materials by studying categories and total volume of waste organic solvents discharged in this science park during the next period, and find out the possible VOCs sources in the science park by selecting the information about categories and total volume of waste organic solvents discharged. And control VOCs efficiently in the future based on this information.
Furthermore, take samples of waste water and air in the sewage treatment plant and in floss holes, correlative sewer intakes of seven factories whose total volume of waste water discharged is greater in the science park. Then, analyse the ingredient and the consistency of the volatile organic substance in the waste water and the air to find out how many categories of volatile organic substances in the sewage discharged by the high-tech industry and to find out the probable position and the probable volume of the volatile organic substance in the course of discharging from factories to the sewage treatment plant and to the environment. And the result of the research is expected to be the reference for the correlative administration departments to control volatile organic substances. There are 2 stages in the water and air sampling and the analysis in the science park. The analysis methods for samples of water and air in the study as follows: the inspection method for volatile organic substances in the water---NIEA W785.53B; the inspection method for volatile organic substances in the air---NIEA A715.11B.
After investigating organic raw materials used by factories, we found that organic raw materials used frequently by factories at present include the developing solution (mixed solvent of organic substances with Ammonia), wet spinner (mixed solvent of organic substances with Propylene Glycol Methyl Ether), striper, Silane, N-NMP, isopropanol, DMSO-Dimethyl Sulfoxide, Carbon Tetrafluoride…etc. We studied more than 3,400 tons of organic raw materials used by factories in this science park per month. But when we studied the information about categories and volume of organic solvents discharged, we found that the information about waste organic substances we could select was very limited. And by studying the information available, we found that nearly all the organic solvents used by factories were reclaimed. Therefore, we still cannot find out the source of VOCs in the science park through the primary results of studying categories and volume of organic solvents discharged.
The result on the first stage shows that there are 8 volatile organic substances in water samples as follows: Dichlorodifluoromethane, Dichloromethane, Benzene, Toluene, Ethyl benzene, m & p–Xylene, o–Xylene and 1, 2, 4–Trichlorobenzne. And there are 10 volatile organic substances in air samples as follows: Acetone, 2-Butanone, Dichlorodifluoromethane, Dichloromethane, Benzene, Toluene, Ethyl benzene, m & p–Xylene, o–Xylene and 1, 2, 4–Trichlorobenzne. On the second stage, we analyzed the substances mentioned above and the result shows that the relations between the high-tech industry and the volatile organic substance are: factories of integrate circuit produce Dichlorodifluoromethane, m & p–Xylene and o–Xylene; factories of photoelectric industry produce Benzene, Toluene, Ethyl benzene, m & p–Xylene, o–Xylene and 1,2,4-Trichlorobenzene; factories of biotechnology produce Benzene, Toluene, Ethyl benzene and 1,2,4-Trichlorobenzene.
The consistency of volatile organic substances mentioned above in samples of water and air is so low that it is much lower than the threshold of human olfaction. But most volatile organic substances existing in the water volatilize during the discharge, and the most obvious volatilization exists in sewage balance tanks and biological aeration tanks in the sewage treatment plant.
At present, we haven’t established a perfect management and control system for volatile organic substances in the science park yet. Although volatile organic substances will put direct influences on human health and sense, volatile organic substances inspected by our analysis methods don’t exceed the threshold of human according to the results of the study at present, and their influences on the science park are very limited. And because organic materials used by factories in the science park are different from that used by the traditional industry, we still need to use other inspection methods, such as OP-FTIR, TO-14, to find out whether there are other organic substances that cannot be identified by our analysis methods. And we suggest that administration department establish an improved management and control system for organic solvents from source to discharge and to reclaim.
