The School System in the Trogir Area during the XIXth and XXth centuries
During the first decades of the 19th century, alongside economic backwardness and dire living conditions, the school system found itself in a very difficult state. It was neglected and left to the church. From earliest times schooling in the Trogir area had been underdeveloped so that when the first Austrian administration was inplemented it confirmed the lamentable state of education of the people in this region of Dalmatia. In 1802 Trogir saw the opening of a school of medicine called the Class of St. Lazarus which at the time had the status of a high school but it was not of long duration because it was closed down by 1809. The class itself lasted up to 1821. The decree concerning public education from 1807 devolved it to being a gymnasium while the reorganisation of schools from 1811 established a college (a lower gymnasium) in Trogir. During the French administration public elementary schools for boys and girls were established in Trogir but did not last long. At the end of the 1810/1811 school year there were boys schools in Trogir, Kaštel Lukšić, Kaštel Štafilić and Kaštel Novi. Up to 1826 when a two-grade higher boys school and a one year girls lower elementary school at the convent of Benedictyine nuns was opened in Trogir, the school system stagnated and there were no major changes in the number of schools which used Italian under the jurisdiction of the church. Gradually the number of boys elementary schools increased, especially the auxilliary schools operated by parish priests in the villages while the existent ones saw improvements. The parish priest Mate Miličević began a public classroom teaching in Croatian on the island of Drvenik. The local priest ran a lower elementary school in Marina in 1844 while a boys elementary school was established in 1888 to be transformed in 1897 into a six year boys public elementary school. Illiteracy in Trogir and its vicinity was large as can be seen from the Trogir marriage register which records 243 marriages from 1850 to 1857 with 217 illiterate marriage partners. In 1862 the Trogir boys elementary school was promoted to the level of a higher four year elementary school. In 1869 the elementary girls school in the convent of St. Nicholas became a private girls school. The same year an agricultural course was started and connected to the boys elementary school. Under the influence of revolutionary developments in Europe, the government in Wien decreed in 1848 that teaching in elementary schools ought also to be carried out in the mother tongue of those attending school. The decree was slowly implemented and where it was actually put into practice this was due to the insistent efforts of patriots and the supporters of the native languages. Grading for the subject of Croatian language appear in the school registers of the Trogir girls elementary school the first time in the first semester of the 1848/1849 school year and after a year's break in 1850/1851 to continue afterwards without exception. Croatian was taught as a second or minor language. It was only after the election victory of the People's party in 1885/1886 that Croatian was introduced as the language of teaching into the general public elementary school. The Franciscans and other clergymen who taught children within their parishes played an enormous role in the school system and the general enlightenment of the people. Through the efforts of brother Frane Poljak a boys elementary auxiliary school with brother Ivan Vujčić teaching was opened in 1856 in Ljubitovica in the Trogir hinterland. The first school to be officially opened in the hinterland was in 1936 in Gornji Seget. In Blizna and Bristivica children were taught elementary literacy by brother Jakov Bartulović. After the closing down of the private girls school with the right of public activity, a public elementary girls school with three classes was opened in 1903 in Trogir. During the time of the Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes, that is Yugoslavia, a public school was opened in Trogir in 1921. Its teaching was in the spirit of the ruling dynasty. From 1922 to 1936 there were 10 openings of schools in the coastal and hinterland villages of the Trogir region and in 1936 an elementary school opened in Vinišća. During the Italian occupation between 1941 and 1943, according to the decrees of the then Dalmatian government teaching was carried out according to the school laws in Italian and in the Fascist spirit. In February 1942 Trogir saw the opening of a Civics school, a high school and an elementary school. Some time later village elementary schools were opened and the activity of all schools which operated before the capitulation of Yugoslavia was reconvened. Three new schools on the island of Ploča, in Gustirna and Donji Okruk were opened. Italian teachers terrorised the children in schools and the villagers so that they were called off in March 1943. After the Germans took Trogir on February 7, 1943 and during the administration of Trogir under the Independent Croatian State there was a general lower high school in Trogir. After the capitulation of Italy the newly-established government organised the schools according to the spirit of the National Liberation program. Courses to spread literacy, programs for general education and elementary schools were implemented. After the liberation of Trogir in 1945 a lower gymansium was established to replace the Civics school. The city library was opened the same year. From 1945 to 1956 intensive repairs were carried out on school buildings, new ones were built and better conditions were implemented in schools. In 1949 the school buildings in Seget and Prapatnica were completed, those in Ljubitovica and Gornji Okruk were begun while in 1954 the schools in Donja Blizna and Vrsine underwent a process of adoptation. New schools were constructed in Seget-Vranjica, Mitla and Donji Seget. In 1956 a new school was built in Vinovac. A People's university was established in 1956 in Trogir which up to the nineties housed a printer and a movie theatre. The fifties saw the establishment of the vocational school which afterwards grew into the industrial school or a school with practical training. In the seventies it became the center for education and directed schooling. In 1992 the center was divided into the vocational school "Blaž Jurjev of Trogir" and the high school "Ivan Lucić" which houses the gymnasium and the school of economics. The musical school "Josip Hatze" from Split established in 1994/95 its regional school in Trogir. At the end of the 1994/1995 school year there were two high schools, a regional musical school, an open university and three elemenatry schools in the city of Trogir; in the county of Marina there were 6 elementary schools and in the county of Seget there were 4 elementary schools. Since the autumn of 1998 the elementary school in Drvenik has been reopened with 6 pupils as a regional school of the elementary school "Majstor Radovan". In the Trogir and Marina counties preschool education has also got under way. There are kindergardens in Blizna, Trogir, Vinišća, Marina, Gustirna and Vrsine. During the period considered in this paper the schools were a source of inspiration, a place of cultural and social happenings in the Trogir region.
