alternativeA Study on the Imagery of Taiwan in Chen Qian-Wu’s Poetry
abstractFormosa, Taiwan, has been praised by adventurers and much expectedly by immigrants. Due to its specific location, Taiwan became a battleground, creating a complicated political history that resulted in multiethnic cultures. The themes and topics surrounding Taiwanese cultures and history have inspired artists and writers to present the specific characters of Taiwan in their works.    In the 1920s, Taiwan’s new literary movement began. Modern free-verse poetry replaced classical metric poetry and became prominent in Taiwanese literature. Chen Qian-Wu (1922~2012) was born in the age that coincided with the new literary movement. He started writing in 1939, and after 60 decades, he had completed more than 400 works that provided literary achievements and valuable records about the evolving landscape and history of Taiwan.    Focusing on “the imagery of Taiwan”, this thesis discusses how Chen Qian-Wu presented Taiwanese imagery in his poems. The purpose of this research is to penetrate how the local poet used imagery to portrait Taiwan in his poems and to analyze his literary art in composing modern poetry.    The results show that the topics and contents in Chen Qian-Wu’s poetry are broad and abundant. The imagery in his poems includes Taiwan’s landscape imagery (cityscape, road and alley, nature and country scenery) and cultural imagery (people and customs, religions, history and politics). In his poems, the imagery exists not only in the pictures of beautiful scenery but also in the paintings depicting how Taiwanese people suffered from colonial and authoritarian rule, their resistance, and how they struggled for democracy. With the use of colorful imagery, Chen Qian-Wu completed creative and flexible free verse representing the aesthetic art of contemporary poetry in Taiwan. His poetry is an important achievement in Taiwanese literature. Since his works left behind historical records through past years, it can be also used as teaching materials. The findings of this thesis will be a great benefit to the studies on Taiwanese literature and cultures.
