Near field communications: privacy, regulation & business models
The implications of extended and intensive use of near field communications (NFC) are far reaching
for new business applications, for the delivery of public services such as transport, and for public
policy. This technology is transformative for a large number of applications and has stimulated
innumerable innovative forms, but so far there has been insufficient insight expressed in discussions
about its impact and risks. The purpose of these studies is to assess the character and use of contactless
payment technologies and the future of NFC with a focus on what are by far its most extensive
applications in public transport. We use our evidence to structure a new understanding of the economic,
business, legal and policy aspects of its anticipated widespread growth, especially as embodied in
mobile devices.
NFC wireless technology allows information to be exchanged, via radio signals, between two NFCenabled
devices over short distances. To date the most extensively used form of payment is contactless
travel card tickets. However, NFC is increasingly being used on mobile phones with an 'electronic
wallet' function, which allows people to make payments and manage other forms of exchange.
The lack of insightful discussion of these far reaching effects brings significant risks. They include a
new level of intensity of the pressure to undermine (or alter) principles and practices of safeguarding
privacy. They raise concerns about the special status of children and other unwary users whose privacy
might be compromised. They also intensify the concern we might have about breaches of data security
or data loss, given the ability of NFC data to include location as well as payment information.
We review the regulations and policies governing NFC in Europe and Asia and the incentives and
barriers to the commercial development of NFC. The use of contactless payment technologies in public
transport ticketing schemes – such as the Oyster card in London and the Octopus card in Hong Kong
provide case studies for the research. Our investigation is based on legal and business analyses, case
studies and considerations of the changing functionalities of NFC. We have also interviewed numerous
experts in regulation, policy and business about trends in investment and policy.An overriding concern is that NFC will fail to achieve its potential. Until problems such as those associated with privacy and regulations are
overcome there will be insufficient progress on extending
the business models in ways stakeholders such as public authorities, consumers and investors expect.
Given the large scale of activities, any such delay would be extremely costly both in terms of
investments and in terms of the expectations of this element of the ubiquitous digital infrastructure.
This report has eight sections. The first section covers the introduction to the research. Section two is a
summary of the aspects to be taken into account for NFC and its application for public transport.
Section 3 describes the theoretical foundations of the analysis. Section 4 focuses on the contentious
issues emerging from NFC, privacy and business models. Section 5 discusses the implications of
extending the NFC public transport experiences to other business cases. Section 6 presents our view on
the future of NFC and its competitive environment. Section 7 addresses the key relationships that will
determine NFC’s future, and section 8 presents our conclusions and our views on policy implications.
We also present our case about the implications for business models development. The document
concludes with an appendix of cases studied.
