Spirituality and religiosity: A qualitative analysis in a general population of Thessaly.
Introduction: Spirituality is a composite and multidimensional field of human experience which involves cognitive experiences and different prospective of behavior. Most research that is done about spirituality is principally qualitative in which phenomenological rapprochements and story narration are used. Goal: The goal of the specific research is the study of the qualitative features which came from the use of the questionnaire: “The Royal Free Interview for Religious and Spiritual Beliefs” in a general population of Thessaly. Material and Methodology: 393 citizens of Thessaly completed the questionnaire “The Royal Free Interview for Religious and Spiritual Beliefs” which occupies with religious and spiritual beliefs. Results: Having 393 participants, 149 (37,9%) were men and 244 (62,1%) were women. The majority of the women (N= 161,66%) stated that they have equally religious and spiritual beliefs compared to 44,9% of the men. A lot of the participants connected their beliefs to issues concerning their health state while others stated that their lives are interwoven with the meaning of the Orthodox religion and the way that their religion is believed: “Believing in the Orthodox religion, in a great degree, and critical observation and belief to the ecclesiastical way of life. Others divide spirituality and religiosity. Spirituality has to do with the prospects- the point of view of each person.” Some participants showed supernatural concerns while we are impressed by the percentage of people who stated that they have lived an intense experience which brought a new, deeper meaning to their lives. They also stated that they felt that they were unified with the world or the universe. 58 participants occupied in describing their experience. Conclusion: The results which came out from their qualitative features of the specific questionnaire are very useful. First of all, there is connection between spirituality and health, while 110 people tried to describe their afterlife state
