10008302_234 - 0.906002827059 - science
[phosphorylation, protein, detection, method]

Detection of low-abundance protein phosphorylation by selective (18)o labeling and mass spectrometry.
Reversible phosphorylation regulates the majority of intracellular networking and pathways. The study of this widely explored post-translational modification is usually challenged by low stoichiometric levels of modification. Many approaches have been developed to overcome this problem and to achieve rigorous characterization of protein phosphorylation. We describe a method for enhanced detection of low-abundance protein phosphorylation that uses selective introduction of (18)O label into phosphorylation sites with H(2)(18)O and mass spectrometric detection. The method was applied to introduce (18)O label into bacterially expressed Aurora A kinase phosphorylation sites and resulted in the representation of phosphorylated peptides as doublets or triplets according to the number of phosphate groups. A total of 28 phosphopeptides were observed by this method.
-------------------------------------

10015082_234 - 0.849647578972 - science
[gene, signaling, nutrient, acid, role, transporter]

The potassium-dependent transcriptome of arabidopsis reveals a prominent role of jasmonic acid in nutrient signaling
Full genome microarrays were used to assess transcriptional responses of Arabidopsis seedlings to changing external supply of the essential macronutrient potassium (K+). Rank product statistics and iterative group analysis were employed to identify differentially regulated genes and statistically significant coregulated sets of functionally related genes. The most prominent response was found for genes linked to the phytohormone jasmonic acid (JA). Transcript levels for the JA biosynthetic enzymes lipoxygenase, allene oxide synthase, and allene oxide cyclase were strongly increased during K+ starvation and quickly decreased after K+ resupply. A large number of well-known JA responsive genes showed the same expression profile, including genes involved in storage of amino acids (VSP), glucosinolate production (CYP79), polyamine biosynthesis (ADC2), and defense (PDF1.2). Our findings highlight a novel role of JA in nutrient signaling and stress management through a variety of physiological processes such as nutrient storage, recycling, and reallocation. Other highly significant K+-responsive genes discovered in our study encoded cell wall proteins (e.g. extensins and arabinogalactans) and ion transporters (e.g. the high-affinity K+ transporter HAK5 and the nitrate transporter NRT2.1) as well as proteins with a putative role in Ca2+ signaling (e.g. calmodulins). On the basis of our results, we propose candidate genes involved in K+ perception and signaling as well as a network of molecular processes underlying plant adaptation to K + deficiency. ?? 2004 American Society of Plant Biologists.
-------------------------------------

10010315_234 - 0.765021982343 - science
[adipose, diabetes, type]

Robust signaling networks of the adipose secretome
Type 2 diabetes is a prototypical complex systems disease that has a strong hereditary component and etiologic links with a sedentary lifestyle, overeating and obesity. Adipose tissue has been shown to be a central driver of type 2 diabetes progression, establishing and maintaining a chronic state of low-level inflammation. The number and diversity of identified endocrine factors from adipose tissue (adipokines) is growing rapidly. Here, I argue that a systems biology approach to understanding the robust multi-level signaling networks established by the adipose secretome will be crucial for developing efficient type 2 diabetes treatment. Recent advances in whole-genome association studies, global molecular profiling and quantitative modeling are currently fueling the emergence of this novel research strategy. ?? 2008 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
-------------------------------------

10018161_234 - 0.777081352317 - science
[cell, color, fabric, electron, cotton, removal, process]

Bio-bleaching of Dyed Cotton Fabric Using a Bacterial Catalyst
Anaerobically grown cells of Shewanella strain J18 143 were able to bio-bleach the color from cotton fabric that was dyed with Remazol Black B (C. I. Reactive Black 5), a common diazo reactive dye. This bio-bleaching process, involving a bacterial catalyst, offers potential benefits to the color industry as the removal of color from dyed fabric opens up the potential for fabric re-use. Growing cells removed the color with greater efficiency than that achieved using pre-grown ``resting{''} cells. Assays of resting cells were used to determine the effect of cell concentration and depth of shade of the dyeing on the color removal process. Further resting cell assays were carried out to ascertain if an electron donor was required for the color removal process, and suggested that the cotton substrate could supply some reducing power to the biocatalyst, although dye reduction rates were maximal with added electron donor (formate). The Shewanella cells were also able to remove the color from dyed cotton fabric that was isolated inside a dialysis membrane to prevent contact with the cells. This indicates that Shewanella strain J18 143 is able to synthesize and excrete endogenous extracellular electron shuttles, eliminating the need for direct contact between the intracellular electron transport components and the extracellular terminal electron acceptors. The dyed cotton fabric was assessed visually, and by reflectance spectroscopy and environmental scanning electron microscopy.
-------------------------------------

10008608_234 - 0.87887819633 - science
[cytokine, sensitization, epidermal, skin, lc, cell, induction, langerhan]

Epidermal cytokines and skin sensitization hazard.
The induction phase of skin sensitization is associated with the passage of antigen-bearing Langerhans cells (LC) from the epidermis to the draining lymph nodes. Recent investigations have revealed that the induction of LC migration following topical sensitization is dependent on tumour necrosis factor alpha (TNF-alpha), an epidermal cytokine. While in transit to the lymph nodes LC are subject to both phenotypic and functional maturation which, by analogy with in vitro studies, is also effected by epidermal cytokines (granulocyte/macrophage colony-stimulating factor, GM-CSF and interleukin-1, IL-1). It is now apparent that Langerhans cell function, the induction of cutaneous immune responses and effective sensitization are dependent on the availability of such cytokines and that contact allergens are able to provoke their production by keratinocytes and by Langerhans cells themselves. The development of screening strategies for the evaluation of skin sensitization potential as a function of epidermal cytokine production is discussed.
-------------------------------------

10011019_234 - 0.712878698471 - science
[behavior, bioreduction, sediment]

Bioreduction behavior of U(VI) sorbed to sediments
cited By (since 1996) 5
-------------------------------------

10008615_234 - 0.75528927521 - science
[chemical, potency, vehicle, skin, llna, datum, relative, influence, effect]

Vehicle effects on skin sensitizing potency of four chemicals: assessment using the local lymph node assay.
The murine local lymph node assay (LLNA) can be used to determine the relative skin sensitizing potency of chemicals via interpolation of the quantitative dose response data generated. Using this approach we have demonstrated previously that the vehicle matrix in which a chemical allergen is encountered on the skin can have a significant influence on sensitizing potency. Estimates of relative potency are calculated from LLNA dose responses as a function of the mathematically derived EC3 value, this being the concentration estimated to induce a stimulation index (SI) of 3. To investigate further the influence of application vehicle on sensitizing potency, the LLNA has been used to examine the activity of four recognized human contact allergens: isoeugenol and cinnamic aldehyde, two fragrance chemicals; 3-dimethylaminopropylamine (a sensitizing impurity of cocamidopropyl betaine, a surfactant used in shower gel) and dibromodicyanobutane (the sensitizing component of Euxyl K 400, a preservative used in cosmetics). The four chemicals were applied in each of seven different vehicles (acetone: olive oil 4 : 1; dimethylsulphoxide; methylethylketone; dimethyl formamide; propylene glycol; and both 50 : 50 and 90 : 10 mixtures of ethanol and water). It was found that the vehicle in which a chemical is presented to the epidermis can have a marked effect on sensitizing activity. EC3 values ranged from 0.9 to 4.9% for isoeugenol, from 0.5 to 1.7% for cinnamic aldehyde, from 1.7 to > 10% for dimethylaminopropylamine and from 0.4 to 6.4% for dibromodicyanobutane. These data confirm that the vehicle in which a chemical is encountered on the skin has an important influence on the relative skin sensitizing potency of chemicals and may have a significant impact on the acquisition of allergic contact dermatitis. The data also demonstrate the utility of the LLNA as a method for the prediction of these effects and thus for the development of more accurate risk assessments.
-------------------------------------

10003596_234 - 0.8459203252 - science
[gfi1, hematopoietic, endothelial, progenitor, endothelium, eht, gfi1b, cell, runx1, hemogenic]

GFI1 and GFI1B control the loss of endothelial identity of hemogenic endothelium during hematopoietic commitment.
Recent studies have established that during embryonic development, hematopoietic progenitors and stem cells are generated from hemogenic endothelium precursors through a process termed endothelial to hematopoietic transition (EHT). The transcription factor RUNX1 is essential for this process, but its main downstream effectors remain largely unknown. Here, we report the identification of Gfi1 and Gfi1b as direct targets of RUNX1 and critical regulators of EHT. GFI1 and GFI1B are able to trigger, in the absence of RUNX1, the down-regulation of endothelial markers and the formation of round cells, a morphologic change characteristic of EHT. Conversely, blood progenitors in Gfi1- and Gfi1b-deficient embryos maintain the expression of endothelial genes. Moreover, those cells are not released from the yolk sac and disseminated into embryonic tissues. Taken together, our findings demonstrate a critical and specific role of the GFI1 transcription factors in the first steps of the process leading to the generation of hematopoietic progenitors from hemogenic endothelium.
-------------------------------------

10010331_234 - 0.935132661271 - science
[protein, vacuolar, membrane, vacuole]

The yeast vacuolar membrane proteome
Transport of solutes between the cytosol and the vacuolar lumen is of crucial importance for various functions of vacuoles, including ion homeostasis; detoxification; storage of different molecules such as amino acids, phosphate, and calcium ions; and proteolysis. To identify proteins that catalyze solute transport across the vacuolar membrane, the membrane proteome of purified Saccharomyces cerevisiae vacuoles was analyzed. Subtractive proteomics was used to distinguish contaminants from true vacuolar proteins by comparing the relative abundances of proteins in pure and crude preparations. A robust statistical analysis combining enrichment ranking with the double boundary iterative group analysis revealed that 148 proteins were significantly enriched in the pure vacuolar preparations. Among these proteins were well characterized vacuolar proteins, such as the subunits of the vacuolar H+-ATPase, but also proteins that had not previously been assigned to a cellular location, many of which are likely novel vacuolar membrane transporters, e.g. for nucleosides and oligopeptides. Although the majority of contaminating proteins from other organelles were depleted from the pure vacuolar membranes, some proteins annotated to reside in other cellular locations were enriched along with the vacuolar proteins. In many cases the enrichment of these proteins is biologically relevant, and we discuss that a large group is involved in membrane fusion and protein trafficking to vacuoles and may have multiple localizations. Other proteins are degraded in vacuoles, and in some cases database annotations are likely to be incomplete or incorrect. Our work provides a wealth of information on vacuolar biology and a solid basis for further characterization of vacuolar functions. ?? 2009 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.
-------------------------------------

10018289_234 - 0.849973279147 - science
[chemokine, immunopathology, rsv, expression, mouse, infection, th2, cell, production]

Differential chemokine expression following respiratory virus infection reflects Th1- or Th2-biased immunopathology.
Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) is a major viral pathogen of infants that also reinfects adults. During RSV infection, inflammatory host cell recruitment to the lung plays a central role in determining disease outcome. Chemokines mediate cell recruitment to sites of inflammation and are influenced by, and influence, the production of cytokines. We therefore compared chemokine production in a mouse model of immunopathogenic RSV infection in which either Th1 or Th2 immunopathology is induced by prior sensitization to individual RSV proteins. Chemokine expression profiles were profoundly affected by the nature of the pulmonary immunopathology: "Th2" immunopathology in BALB/c mice was associated with increased and prolonged expression of CCL2 (MCP-1), CXCL10 (IP-10), and CCL11 (eotaxin) starting within 24 h of challenge. C57BL/6 mice with "Th2" pathology (enabled by a deficiency of CD8+ cells) also showed increased CCL2 production. No differences in chemokine receptor expression were detected. Chemokine blockers may therefore be of use for children with bronchiolitis.
-------------------------------------

10004728_234 - 0.940775401177 - science
[fluid, shear, phpa, viscosity, polymer]

Observations on viscosity reduction of PHPA polymer support fluids
Polymer fluids have been used in foundation drilling for many years and yet no previous studies have been reported which assess their sensitivity to shear such as is induced by pumping equipment. A field study has been carried out on two specific polymer products under actual site conditions. It is found that there is a significant loss of viscosity when partially hydrolyzed polyacrylamide (PHPA) fluids are circulated through a centrifugal pump in a loop system. This behavior is quite distinct from that of bentonite slurries which require high shear mixing and recirculation to ensure good hydration. At first sight the sensitivity of PHPA fluids to shear may be perceived as a disadvantage but in fact if shear can be reduced so can on-site energy consumption. A reduction in fluid viscosity was also observed over a standing period between mixing and use, suggesting that a second mechanism may be contributing to the properties change. From the trial results, recommendations are given on pump selection and on the maintenance of fluid properties.
-------------------------------------

10005311_234 - 0.908246917548 - science
[gene, keloid, margin, kd, biopsy, skin, culture, expression, study, biomarker]

Identification of novel keloid biomarkers through Profiling of Tissue Biopsies versus Cell Cultures in Keloid Margin specimens Compared to adjacent Normal Skin.
Objective: Keloid disease (KD) is a benign fibroproliferative skin tumor that results from abnormal wound healing and has no single definitive treatment. This study aims to identify KD biomarkers, which are cellular mediators that can serve as indicators of normal, pathological, and therapeutic processes. Methods: Bioinformatics analytic approaches, including comprehensive literature searches and DAVID Bioinformatics Resources 2008, were performed on the established KD linkage and previously reported microarray data to identify potential candidate genes for the study. Keloid margins and unaffected skin were obtained from KD patients (n = 4). RNA was extracted from the biopsies and second-passage culture equivalents. Reverse-transcriptase quantitative polymerase chain reactions were used to determine the gene expression levels. Student t tests were used to analyze the statistical significance in differential gene expressions. Results: Nineteen candidate genes were initially selected by bioinformatics analysis. Of the 19 genes, 10 were significantly (P < .05) upregulated in keloid margin biopsy specimens. The top-5 fold changes range from 10-fold to 175-fold, including aggrecan; asporin; inhibin, beta A; tumor necrosis factor-alpha inducible protein 6; and chromosome 5 open reading frame 13. There was no significant differential gene expression between the fibroblasts established using keloid margin or internal control sites. Conclusions: The transcriptomic data generated from cultures did not consistently correlate to the biopsy equivalents. This study has demonstrated 10 genes that are significantly upregulated in biopsy samples of keloid margin, 5 of which have a fold change higher than 10-fold. Importantly these genes may serve as a potential biomarker for KD.
-------------------------------------

10003087_234 - 0.827713062706 - science
[cartilage, bml, change, within-grade, aor, ci, grade, assessment, damage, worsening]

Predictive validity of within-grade scoring of longitudinal changes of MRI-based cartilage morphology and bone marrow lesion assessment in the tibio-femoral joint - the MOST study.
OBJECTIVE: In order to increase sensitivity to detect longitudinal change, recording of within-grade changes was introduced for cartilage morphology and bone marrow lesion (BML) assessment in semiquantitative magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scoring of knee osteoarthritis (OA). The aim of this study was to examine the validity provided by within-grade scoring. DESIGN: The Multicenter Osteoarthritis (MOST) study is a longitudinal study of subjects with or at risk of knee OA. Baseline and 30 months MRIs were read according to the modified Whole-Organ Magnetic Resonance Imaging Score (WORMS) system including within-grade changes for cartilage and BMLs. We tested the validity of within-grade changes by whether the 30-month changes in cartilage and BML assessment were predicted by baseline ipsi-compartmental meniscal damage and malalignment, factors known to affect cartilage loss and BMLs, using ordinal logistic regression. RESULTS: 1867 Knees (from 1411 participants) were included. Severe medial meniscal damage predicted partial grade (adjusted odds ratio (aOR) 4.4, 95% confidence interval (95% CI) 2.2, 8.7) but not ≥full grade (aOR 1.3, 95% CI 0.8, 2.2) worsening of cartilage loss and predicted both, partial grade (aOR 9.6, 95% CI 3.6, 25.1) and ≥full grade (aOR 5.1, 95% CI 3.2, 8.2) worsening of BMLs. Severe, but not moderate, malalignment predicted ipsi-compartmental within-grade (medial cartilage damage: aOR 5.5, 95% CI 2.6, 11.6; medial worsening of BMLs: aOR 4.9, 95% CI 2.0, 12.3) but not full grade worsening of BMLs and cartilage damage. CONCLUSIONS: Within-grade changes in semiquantitative MRI assessment of cartilage and BMLs are valid and their use may increase the sensitivity of semiquantitative readings in detecting longitudinal changes in these structures.
-------------------------------------

10003524_234 - 0.879691393987 - science
[arsenic, sediment, bengal, release]

Role of metal-reducing bacteria in arsenic release from Bengal delta sediments.
The contamination of ground waters, abstracted for drinking and irrigation, by sediment-derived arsenic threatens the health of tens of millions of people worldwide, most notably in Bangladesh and West Bengal. Despite the calamitous effects on human health arising from the extensive use of arsenic-enriched groundwaters in these regions, the mechanisms of arsenic release from sediments remain poorly characterized and are topics of intense international debate. We use a microscosm-based approach to investigate these mechanisms: techniques of microbiol. and mol. ecol. are used in combination with aq. and solid phase speciation anal. of arsenic. Here we show that anaerobic metal-reducing bacteria can play a key role in the mobilization of arsenic in sediments collected from a contaminated aquifer in West Bengal. We also show that, for the sediments in this study, arsenic release took place after Fe(III) redn., rather than occurring simultaneously. Identification of the crit. factors controlling the biogeoche
-------------------------------------

10008946_234 - 0.905353328288 - science
[cell, surface, immobilization, response, film, pcl, rgd, adhesion, schwann]

Immobilization of cell-binding peptides on poly-ε-caprolactone film surface to biomimic the peripheral nervous system.
AbstractCell-material interactions are crucial for cell adhesion and proliferation on biomaterial surfaces. Immobilization of biomolecules leads to the formation of biomimetic substrates, improving cell response. We introduced RGD (Arg-Gly-Asp) sequences on poly-ε-caprolactone (PCL) film surfaces using thiol chemistry to enhance Schwann cell (SC) response. XPS elemental analysis indicated an estimate of 2-3% peptide functionalization on the PCL surface, comparable with carbodiimide chemistry. Contact angle was not remarkably reduced; hence, cell response was only affected by chemical cues on the film surface. Adhesion and proliferation of Schwann cells were enhanced after PCL modification. Particularly, RGD immobilization increased cell attachment up to 40% after 6 h of culture. It was demonstrated that SC morphology changed from round to very elongated shape when surface modification was carried out, with an increase in the length of cellular processes up to 50% after 5 days of culture. Finally RGD immobilization triggered the formation of focal adhesion related to higher cell spreading. In summary, this study provides a method for immobilization of biomolecules on PCL films to be used in peripheral nerve repair, as demonstrated by the enhanced response of Schwann cells.
-------------------------------------

10009389_234 - 0.803529026153 - science
[computation, chemical, s20111]

Biologically Inspired Computation for Chemical Sensing
S20111
-------------------------------------

10011713_234 - 0.897959355862 - science
[tm, immunoreactivity, placenta, endothelium, subunit, syncytin]

Syncytin 1 in the human placenta.
This study characterises HERV-W (syncytin 1) expression in normal and pathologic placenta and in BeWo cells. HERV-W mRNA levels were higher in the first trimester than at term, and similar patterns were observed with another retrovirally-derived mRNA species, ERV-3. N-glycosylated syncytin 1 precursor (73 kDa) is cleaved to surface-associated (SU) and transmembrane (TM) subunits. Both were evident in villous trophoblast, where perinuclear and punctate cytoplasmic deposits were observed, and linear TM subunit immunoreactivity was seen at the syncytial microvillous membrane. Punctate immunoreactivity was seen in BeWo cells with antibodies to SU and TM, and the two were co-localised. SU immunoreactivity was observed in association with fetal endothelium, and this effect was increased in tissue from pre-eclamptic placentas, which also showed a higher level of total SU protein. Absence of the TM subunit from endothelium suggests it is not a biosynthetic source. We suggest that SU is released from trophoblast into fetal circulation where it may bind vascular endothelium.
-------------------------------------

10018332_234 - 0.708009420495 - science
[cell, lung, ox40, immune]

A critical role for OX40 in T cell-mediated immunopathology during lung viral infection.
Respiratory infections are the third leading cause of death worldwide. Illness is caused by pathogen replication and disruption of airway homeostasis by excessive expansion of cell numbers. One strategy to prevent lung immune-mediated damage involves reducing the cellular burden. To date, antiinflammatory strategies have affected both antigen-specific and naive immune repertoires. Here we report a novel form of immune intervention that specifically targets recently activated T cells alone. OX40 (CD134) is absent on naive T cells but up-regulated 1-2 d after antigen activation. OX40-immunoglobulin fusion proteins block the interaction of OX40 with its ligand on antigen-presenting cells and eliminate weight loss and cachexia without preventing virus clearance. Reduced proliferation and enhanced apoptosis of lung cells accompanied the improved clinical phenotype. Manipulation of this late costimulatory pathway has clear therapeutic potential for the treatment of dysregulated lung immune responses.
-------------------------------------

10009682_234 - 0.811288970272 - science
[erk5, kinase, protein, response, neuron, survival, factor, extracellular]

Regulation of neuronal survival by the extracellular signal-regulated protein kinase 5.
The extracellular signal-regulated protein kinase 5 (ERK5) is a mitogen-activated protein kinase that phosphorylates and regulates various transcription factors in response to growth factors and extracellular stresses. To address its biological function during the development of the peripheral nervous system (PNS), we have engineered a novel model of sympathetic neurons in which the erk5 gene can be deleted in vitro. Our data provide for the first time genetic evidence that ERK5 is required to mediate the survival response of neurons to nerve growth factor. Increased cell death associated with the loss of ERK5 is caused by elevated expression of the BH3-only members of the Bcl-2 family, Bad and Bim. Further investigation indicated that ERK5 suppresses the transcription of the bad and the bim genes by Ca(2+)/cAMP response element-binding protein and Forkhead box O3a, respectively. Consistently, we found that the phosphorylation of both p90 ribosomal S6 kinase and protein kinase B is impaired in neurons lacking ERK5. Together these findings reveal a novel signaling mechanism that promotes neuronal survival during the development of the PNS.
-------------------------------------

10010322_234 - 0.967249780523 - science
[biology, synthetic]

A turning point for natural product discovery-ESF-EMBO research conference: synthetic biology of antibiotic production.
Synthetic Biology is in a critical phase of its development: it has finally reached the point where it can move from proof-of-principle studies to real-world applications. Secondary metabolite biosynthesis, especially the discovery and production of antibiotics, is a particularly relevant target area for such applications of synthetic biology. The first international conference to explore this subject was held in Spain in October 2011. In four sessions on General Synthetic Biology, Filamentous Fungal Systems, Actinomyces Systems, and Tools and Host Structures, scientists presented the most recent technological and scientific advances, and a final-day Forward Look Plenary Discussion identified future trends in the field. ?? 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
-------------------------------------

10018296_234 - 0.700267280107 - science
[lung, immune, inflammatory]

Manipulation of acute inflammatory lung disease.
Inflammatory lung disease to innocuous antigens or infectious pathogens is a common occurrence and in some cases, life threatening. Often, the inflammatory infiltrate that accompanies these events contributes to pathology by deleterious effects on otherwise healthy tissue and by compromising lung function by consolidating (blocking) the airspaces. A fine balance, therefore, exists between a lung immune response and immune-mediated damage, and in some the "threshold of ignorance" may be set too low. In most cases, the contributing, potentially offending, cell population or immune pathway is known, as are factors that regulate them. Why then are targeted therapeutic strategies to manipulate them not more commonplace in clinical medicine? This review highlights immune homeostasis in the lung, how and why this is lost during acute lung infection, and strategies showing promise as future immune therapeutics.
-------------------------------------

10008097_234 - 0.78051815414 - science
[diffusivity, hd, tmt, parietal, test, upsit, fractional, anisotropy, disease, correlation]

The structural correlates of functional deficits in early huntington's disease.
Neuropathological studies in Huntington disease (HD) have demonstrated neuronal loss in the striatum, as well as in other brain regions including the cortex. With diffusion tensor MRI we evaluated the hypothesis that the clinical dysfunction in HD is related to regionally specific lesions of circuit-specific cortico-basal ganglia networks rather than to the striatum only. We included 27 HD and 24 controls from the TRACK-HD Paris cohort. The following assessments were used: self-paced tapping tasks, trail B making test (TMT), University of Pennsylvania smell identification test (UPSIT), and apathy scores from the problem behaviors assessment. Group comparisons of fractional anisotropy and mean diffusivity and correlations were performed using voxel-based analysis. In the cortex, HD patients showed significant correlations between: (i) self paced tapping and mean diffusivity in the parietal lobe at 1.8 Hz and prefrontal areas at 3 Hz, (ii) UPSIT and mean diffusivity in the parietal, and median temporal lobes, the cingulum and the insula, and fractional anisotropy in the insula and the external capsule, (iii) TMT B and mean diffusivity in the white matter of the superior frontal, orbital, temporal, superior parietal and post central areas, and (iv) apathy and fractional anisotropy in the white matter of the rectus gyrus. In the basal ganglia, we found correlations between the self paced tapping, UPSIT, TMT tests, and mean diffusivity in the anterior part of the putamen and the caudate nucleus. In conclusion, disruption of motor, associative and limbic cortico-striatal circuits differentially contribute to the clinical signs of the disease. Hum Brain Mapp, 2012. © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
-------------------------------------

10008372_234 - 0.784884951113 - science
[cell, epithelial, mammary, 1-integrin, proliferation, migration]

Specific β-containing Integrins Exert Differential Control on Proliferation and Two-dimensional Collective Cell Migration in Mammary Epithelial Cells
Understanding how cell cycle is regulated in normal mammary epithelia is essential for deciphering defects of breast cancer and therefore for developing new therapies. Signals provided by both the extracellular matrix and growth factors are essential for epithelial cell proliferation. However, the mechanisms by which adhesion controls cell cycle in normal epithelia are poorly established. In this study, we describe the consequences of removing the β1-integrin gene from primary cultures of mammary epithelial cells in situ, using CreER. Upon β1-integrin gene deletion, the cells were unable to progress efficiently through S-phase, but were still able to undergo collective two-dimensional migration. These responses are explained by the presence of β3-integrin in β1-integrin-null cells, indicating that integrins containing different β-subunits exert differential control on mammary epithelial proliferation and migration. β1-Integrin deletion did not inhibit growth factor signaling to Erk or prevent the recruitment of core adhesome components to focal adhesions. Instead the S-phase arrest resulted from defective Rac activation and Erk translocation to the nucleus. Rac inhibition prevented Erk translocation and blocked proliferation. Activated Rac1 rescued the proliferation defect in β1-integrin-depleted cells, indicating that this GTPase is essential in propagating proliferative β1-integrin signals. These results show that β1-integrins promote cell cycle in mammary epithelial cells, whereas β3-integrins are involved in migration.
-------------------------------------

10016401_234 - 0.741618323214 - science
[potential, ??, oceanic, ikaite, evolution]

Potential of ikaite to record the evolution of oceanic ??18O
cited By (since 1996) 5
-------------------------------------

10004091_234 - 0.9149373791 - science
[alga, process, lipid, glucose, carbohydrate, bioconversion]

A novel process for enhancing oil production in algae biorefineries through bioconversion of solid by-products
This paper focuses on a novel process for adding value to algae residue. In current processes oleaginous microalgae are grown and harvested for lipid production leaving a lipid-free algae residue. The process described here includes conversion of the carbohydrate fraction into glucose prior to lipid extraction. This can be fermented to produce up to 15\% additional lipids using another oleaginous microorganism. It was found that in situ enzymes can hydrolyze storage carbohydrates in the algae into glucose and that a temperature of 55 degrees C for about 20 h gave the best glucose yield. Up to 75\% of available carbohydrates were converted to a generic fermentation feedstock containing 73 g/L glucose. The bioconversion step was found to increase the free water content by 60\% and it was found that when the bioconversion was carried out prior to the extraction step, it improved the solvent extractability of lipids from the algae. (C) 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
-------------------------------------

10008863_234 - 0.803220568248 - science
[ige, protein, response, lactoferrin, igg, novel, form, glycosylation, recombinant, molecule]

Influence of protein expression system on elicitation of IgE antibody responses: experience with lactoferrin.
With increased interest in genetically modified (GM) crop plants there is an important need to understand the properties that contribute to the ability of such novel proteins to provoke immune and/or allergic responses. One characteristic that may be relevant is glycosylation, particularly as novel expression systems (e.g. bacterial to plant) will impact on the protein glycoprofile. The allergenicity (IgE inducing) and immunogenicity (IgG inducing) properties of wild type native human lactoferrin (NLF) from human milk (hm) and neutrophil granules (n) and a recombinant molecule produced in rice (RLF) have been assessed. These forms of lactoferrin have identical amino acid sequences, but different glycosylation patterns: hmNLF and nNLF have complex glycoprofiles including Lewis (Le)(x) structures, with particularly high levels of Le(x) expressed by nNLF, whereas RLF is simpler and rich in mannose residues. Antibody responses induced in BALB/c strain mice by intraperitoneal exposure to the different forms of lactoferrin were characterised. Immunisation with both forms of NLF stimulated substantial IgG and IgE antibody responses. In contrast, the recombinant molecule was considerably less immunogenic and failed to stimulate detectable IgE, irrespective of endotoxin and iron content. The glycans did not contribute to epitope formation, with equivalent IgE and IgG binding recorded for high titre anti-NLF antisera regardless of whether the immunising NLF or the recombinant molecule were used substrates in the analyses. These data demonstrate that differential glycosylation profiles can have a profound impact on protein allergenicity and immunogenicity, with mannose and Le(x) exhibiting opposing effects. These results have clear relevance for characterising the allergenic hazards of novel proteins in GM crops.
-------------------------------------

10008624_234 - 0.892500371491 - science
[lymph, node, skin, function, method, contact, sensitization]

Local lymph node assays.
The murine local lymph node assay (LLNA) allows identification of chemicals that have the potential to cause skin sensitization and allergic contact dermatitis. In this test, contact allergens are identified as a function of events occurring during the induction phase of skin sensitization; specifically, stimulation of proliferative responses in draining lymph nodes measured as a function of radiolabeled thymidine incorporation in situ. Two methods are presented. In one, lymph nodes are pooled on an experimental group basis, while in the other, lymph nodes of individual animal are pooled, which enables statistical analyses. These methods have been developed for contact sensitization hazard assessment and provide a robust and reliable method as an alternative to guinea pig tests which measure skin sensitizing potential as a function of challenge-induced skin reactions in previously sensitized animals. It is also possible to use LLNA data for measurement of relative potency in terms of risk assessment.
-------------------------------------

10018548_234 - 0.927199601674 - science
[stress, intergranular, in-plane, anisotropy, zirconium, texture]

Effects of texture and anisotropy on intergranular stress development in zirconium
The influence of texture and anisotropy on the generation of intergranular stresses in clock-rolled zirconium is investigated using neutron diffraction and elastoplastic self-consistent modelling. Comparison between experimental data and model calculations indicates that the operation mainly of prismatic and basal slip explains the trends in intergranular stress evolution during in-plane tensile and through-thickness compressive deformation, whilst twinning plays a significant role during in-plane compression.
-------------------------------------

10002322_234 - 0.821263232046 - science
[protein]

Protein Motions Are Coupled to the Reaction Chemistry in Coenzyme B(12) -Dependent Ethanolamine Ammonia Lyase.
The role of protein dynamics in promoting catalysis is hotly debated. Infrared data from both ultrafast flash photolysis and stopped-flow studies show that not only does there appear to be vibrational coupling between the cofactor and protein in B(12) -dependent ethanolamine ammonia lyase, but also that there are significant protein motions coupled to the reaction that follows substrate binding.
-------------------------------------

10003589_234 - 0.740166601122 - science
[free-free, derivation, ``, galactic, plane, emission]

A derivation of the free-free emission on the Galactic plane between â„“= 20Â° and 44Â°
DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2966.2012.20796.x; eprintid: arXiv:1108.6268
-------------------------------------

10008187_234 - 0.788460137726 - science
[dc, skin, response, immune, cell, cutaneous, assay, dc-based, use, function]

Dendritic cells and the assessment in vitro of skin sensitizing potential.
It is now well established that dendritic cells (DC) play pivotal roles in the initiation and orchestration of adaptive immune responses, including cutaneous immune responses to chemical allergens that drive the acquisition of skin sensitization. It is not unexpected, therefore, that a large number, and wide variety, of proposed approaches for the identification of skin sensitizing chemicals in vitro are based upon the use of cultured DC or DC-like cells. The use of DC in this context is legitimate. However, with our rapidly increasing understanding of the diversity of cutaneous DC with respect to both phenotype and function, it is timely now to review briefly the potential limitations and interpretive difficulties that are associated with the use of DC-based assays. Among the important considerations are the fact that chemical-induced changes in the characteristics and function of cultured DC will not necessarily reflect accurately the events that that support the development of skin sensitization in vivo. In addition, most DC-based assays are predicated on a view that cutaneous DC have as their primary function the initiation of adaptive immune responses. However, it is now appreciated that cutaneous DC, and in particular epidermal Langerhans cells (LC), may also play important immunoregulatory roles that serve to limit and contain skin immune responses. Notwithstanding these considerations there is reason to believe that at least some in vitro DC-based assays are of value, and indeed some are currently the subject of a formal validation process. However, it is appropriate that such assays are configured and interpreted carefully, and with an appreciation of the complexity of DC biology.
-------------------------------------

10008953_234 - 0.734098031949 - science
[leptin, crp, level, adiposity, measure, resistance, subject]

Epidemiological evidence against a role for C-reactive protein causing leptin resistance.
OBJECTIVE: It has been suggested that elevated levels of C-reactive protein (CRP) might interfere with leptin signalling and contribute to leptin resistance. Our aim was to assess whether plasma levels of CRP influence leptin resistance in humans; and our hypothesis was that CRP levels would modify the cross-sectional relationships between leptin and measures of adiposity. DESIGN AND METHODS: We assessed 4 measures of adiposity: body mass index, waist circumference, fat mass, and % body fat in 2113 British Regional Heart Study (BRHS) men (mean (SD) age 69 (5) years), with replication in 760 (age 69 (6) years) European Male Aging Study (EMAS) subjects. RESULTS: In BRHS subjects leptin correlated with CRP (Spearman's r=0.22, p<0.0001). Leptin and CRP correlated with all 4 measures of adiposity (r-value range: 0.22 to 0.57, all p<0.0001). Age-adjusted mean levels for adiposity measures increased in relation to leptin levels; but CRP level did not consistently influence the β coefficients of the regression lines in a CRP-stratified analysis. In BRHS subjects, the BMI vs. leptin relationship demonstrated a weak statistical interaction with CRP (p=0.04). We observed no similar interaction in EMAS subjects, and no significant interactions with other measures of adiposity in BRHS or EMAS cohorts. CONCLUSION: We have shown that plasma CRP has little influence on the relationship between measures of adiposity and serum leptin levels in these middle-aged and elderly male European cohorts. This study provides epidemiological evidence against CRP having a significant role in causing leptin resistance.
-------------------------------------

10007663_234 - 0.915930323482 - science
[radiation, study, kinetics, mineral, hydrated, synchrotron, mechanism, calcium, energetic, silicate]

Dehydration/recrystallization mechanisms, energetics, and kinetics of hydrated calcium silicate minerals: An in situ TGA/DSC and synchrotron radiation SAXS/WAXS study
cited By (since 1996) 22
-------------------------------------

10007485_234 - 0.775622522386 - science
[ctc, tumour, detection, metastasis, cancer]

Circulating tumour cells, their role in metastasis and their clinical utility in lung cancer.
Circulating tumour cells (CTCs) have attracted much recent interest in cancer research as a potential biomarker and as a means of studying the process of metastasis. It has long been understood that metastasis is a hallmark of malignancy, and conceptual theories on the basis of metastasis from the nineteenth century foretold the existence of a tumour "seed" which is capable of establishing discrete tumours in the "soil" of distant organs. This prescient "seed and soil" hypothesis accurately predicted the existence of CTCs; microscopic tumour fragments in the blood, at least some of which are capable of forming metastases. However, it is only in recent years that reliable, reproducible methods of CTC detection and analysis have been developed. To date, the majority of studies have employed the CellSearch™ system (Veridex LLC), which is an immunomagnetic purification method. Other promising techniques include microfluidic filters, isolation of tumour cells by size using microporous polycarbonate filters and flow cytometry-based approaches. While many challenges still exist, the detection of CTCs in blood is becoming increasingly feasible, giving rise to some tantalizing questions about the use of CTCs as a potential biomarker. CTC enumeration has been used to guide prognosis in patients with metastatic disease, and to act as a surrogate marker for disease response during therapy. Other possible uses for CTC detection include prognostication in early stage patients, identifying patients requiring adjuvant therapy, or in surveillance, for the detection of relapsing disease. Another exciting possible use for CTC detection assays is the molecular and genetic characterization of CTCs to act as a "liquid biopsy" representative of the primary tumour. Indeed it has already been demonstrated that it is possible to detect HER2, KRAS and EGFR mutation status in breast, colon and lung cancer CTCs respectively. In the course of this review, we shall discuss the biology of CTCs and their role in metastagenesis, the most commonly used techniques for their detection and the evidence to date of their clinical utility, with particular reference to lung cancer.
-------------------------------------

10003256_234 - 0.751034631314 - science
[oxide, transition, stress, interface, study, phase, 3dap, alloy, layer, metal]

Towards a mechanistic understanding of corrosion mechanisms in zirconium alloys
Understanding the key corrosion mechanisms in a light water reactor primary water environment is critical to developing and exploiting improved zirconium alloy fuel cladding. In this paper, we report recent research highlights from a new collaborative research programme involving 3 U.K. universities and 5 partners from the nuclear industry. A major part of our strategy is to use the most advanced analytical tools to characterise the oxide and metal/oxide interface microstructure, residual stresses, as well as the transport properties of the oxide. These techniques include three-dimensional atom probe (3DAP), advanced transmission electron microscopy (TEM), synchrotron X-ray diffraction, Raman spectroscopy, and in situ electro-impedance spectroscopy. Synchrotron X-ray studies have enabled the characterisation of stresses, tetragonal phase fraction, and texture in the oxide as well as the stresses in the metal substrate. It was found that in the thick oxide (here, Optimized-ZIRLO, a trademark of the Westinghouse Electric Company, tested at 415°C in steam) a significant stress profile can be observed, which cannot be explained by metal substrate creep alone but that local delamination of the oxide layers due to crack formation must also play an important role. It was also found that the oxide stresses in the monoclinic and tetragonal phases grown on Zircaloy-4 (autoclave testing at 360°C) first relax during the pre-transition stage. Just before transition, the compressive stress in the monoclinic phase suddenly rises, which is interpreted as indirect evidence of significant tetragonal to monoclinic phase transformation taking place at this stage. TEM studies of pre- and post-transition oxides grown on ZIRLO, a trademark of the Westinghouse Electric Company, have used Fresnel contrast imaging to identify nano-sized pores along the columnar grain boundaries that form a network interconnected once the material goes through transition. The development of porosity during transition was further confirmed by in situ electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) studies. 3DAP analysis was used to identify a ZrO sub-oxide layer at the metal/oxide interface and to establish its three-dimensional morphology. It was possible to demonstrate that this sub-oxide structure develops with time and changes dramatically around transition. This observation was further confirmed by in situ EIS studies, which also suggest thinning of the sub-oxide/barrier layer around transition. Finally, 3DAP analysis was used to characterise segregation of alloying elements near the metal/oxide interface and to establish that the corroding metal near the interface (in this case ZIRLO) after 100 days at 360°C displays a substantially different chemistry and microstructure compared to the base alloy with Fe segregating to the Zr/ZrO interface.
-------------------------------------

10008185_234 - 0.915977777192 - science
[skin, chemical, receptor, sensitization, danger, necessary]

Danger, intracellular signaling, and the orchestration of dendritic cell function in skin sensitization.
Allergic contact dermatitis is an important occupational and environmental disease caused by topical exposure to chemical allergens. An area of considerable interest and, in the context of hazard identification and characterization, an area of great importance is developing an understanding of the characteristics that confer on chemicals the ability to cause skin sensitization. For the successful acquisition of skin sensitization, it is necessary that a chemical must gain access to the viable epidermis, form stable immunogenic associations with host proteins, and provide the necessary stimuli for the activation, mobilization, and maturation of skin dendritic cells (DC). It is the last of these properties that is the subject of this article. The purpose here is to review the mechanisms through which skin sensitizers provide the triggers necessary for engagement of cutaneous DC. Of particular interest are the nature and function of danger signals elicited by skin sensitizing chemicals. Among the pathways considered here are those involving Toll-like receptors, C-type lectin receptors, neuropeptide receptors, prostanoid receptors, and the inflammasome. Collectively, danger signals in the skin provide a bridge between the innate and adaptive immune systems and are of pivotal importance for the initiation of cutaneous immune responses, including those to chemical allergens that result in skin sensitization.
-------------------------------------

10018163_234 - 0.951439320634 - science
[flavin, electron, mfc, concentration, current, shuttle, cell, mu]

The effect of flavin electron shuttles in microbial fuel cells current production
The effect of electron shuttles on electron transfer to microbial fuel cell (MFC) anodes was studied in systems where direct contact with the anode was precluded. MFCs were inoculated with Shewanella cells, and flavins used as the electron shuttling compound. In MFCs with no added electron shuttles, flavin concentrations monitored in the MFCs' bulk liquid increased continuously with FMN as the predominant flavin. The maximum concentrations were 0.6 mu M for flavin mononucleotide and 0.2 mu M for riboflavin. In MFCs with added flavins, micro-molar concentrations were shown to increase current and power output. The peak current was at least four times higher in MFCs with high concentrations of flavins (4.5-5.5 mu M) than in MFCs with low concentrations (0.2-0.6 mu M). Although high power outputs (around 150 mW/m(2)) were achieved in MFCs with high concentrations of flavins, a Clostridium-like bacterium along with other reactor limitations affected overall coulombic efficiencies (CE) obtained, achieving a maximum CE of 13\%. Electron shuttle compounds (flavins) permitted bacteria to utilise a remote electron acceptor (anode) that was not accessible to the cells allowing current production until the electron donor (lactate) was consumed.
-------------------------------------

10016813_234 - 0.739146664513 - science
[microarray, ecological, gene]

Microarray challenges in ecology
Microarrays are used to measure simultaneously the amount of mRNAs transcribed from many genes. They were originally designed for gene expression profiling in relatively simple biological systems, such as cell lines and model systems under constant laboratory conditions. This poses a challenge to ecologists who increasingly want to use microarrays to unravel the genetic mechanisms underlying complex interactions among organisms and between organisms and their environment. Here, we discuss typical experimental and statistical problems that arise when analyzing genome-wide expression profiles in an ecological context. We show that experimental design and environmental confounders greatly influence the identification of candidate genes in ecological microarray studies, and that following several simple recommendations could facilitate the analysis of microarray data in ecological settings. ?? 2007 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
-------------------------------------

10010317_234 - 0.878379865825 - science
[phenotypic, line, qtl, spectrometry, system-wide, mass, trait, time-of-flight, molecular, arabidopsis]

System-wide molecular evidence for phenotypic buffering in Arabidopsis
We profiled 162 lines of Arabidopsis for variation in transcript, protein and metabolite abundance using mRNA microarrays, two-dimensional polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis, gas chromatography time-of-flight mass spectrometry, liquid chromatography quadrupole time-of-flight mass spectrometry, and proton nuclear magnetic resonance. We added all publicly available phenotypic data from the same lines and mapped quantitative trait loci (QTL) for 40,580 molecular and 139 phenotypic traits. We found six QTL hot spots with major, system-wide effects, suggesting there are six breakpoints in a system otherwise buffered against many of the 500,000 SNPs. ?? 2009 Nature America, Inc. All rights reserved.
-------------------------------------

10003272_234 - 0.759514924461 - science
[trpv3, human, hair, growth]

Activation of transient receptor potential vanilloid-3 inhibits human hair growth.
In the current study, we aimed at identifying the functional role of transient receptor potential vanilloid-3 (TRPV3) ion channel in the regulation of human hair growth. Using human organ-cultured hair follicles (HFs) and cultures of human outer root sheath (ORS) keratinocytes, we provide the first evidence that activation of TRPV3 inhibits human hair growth. TRPV3 immunoreactivity was confined to epithelial compartments of the human HF, mainly to the ORS. In organ culture, TRPV3 activation by plant-derived (e.g., eugenol, 10-1,000 μM) or synthetic (e.g., 2-aminoethoxydiphenyl borate, 1-300 μM) agonists resulted in a dose-dependent inhibition of hair shaft elongation, suppression of proliferation, and induction of apoptosis and premature HF regression (catagen). Human ORS keratinocytes also expressed functional TRPV3, whose stimulation induced membrane currents, elevated intracellular calcium concentration, inhibited proliferation, and induced apoptosis. Of great importance, these effects on ORS keratinocytes were all mediated by TRPV3, as small interfering RNA-mediated silencing of TRPV3 effectively abrogated the cellular actions of the above agonists. These findings collectively support the concept that TRPV3 signaling is a significant player in human hair growth control. Therefore, TRPV3 and the related intracellular signaling mechanism might function as a promising target for pharmacological manipulations of clinically relevant hair growth disorders.
-------------------------------------

10005554_234 - 0.834738056853 - science
[resistance, aspergillosis, azole, number]

Azole antifungal resistance today: focus on Aspergillus.
Oral triazole therapy is well established for the treatment of invasive aspergillosis (IPA), allergic aspergillosis (ABPA), and chronic pulmonary aspergillosis (CPA), and is often long-term. Resistance to triazole azole antifungal drugs in Aspergillus fumigatus is now a major clinical problem in a number of European locations, in China, Canada and the USA with particularly high frequencies from the north-west of the UK, and The Netherlands. A number of centers are reporting the continuing increasing frequency and evolution of resistance mechanisms in A. fumigatus, in both azole-naïve and patients treated with azoles. The increasing rate of resistance is of concern. A number of resistance mechanisms have been found. The biofilm modality of Aspergillus growth may have a number of therapeutic implications for aspergillosis, including antifungal resistance. Microbiological diagnosis of aspergillosis is limited by poor culture yield, leading to uncertainty about the frequency of triazole resistance. Direct resistance testing in culture-negative clinical samples may add additional insights into the prevalence of azole resistance in A. fumigatus.
-------------------------------------

10008766_234 - 0.797369978451 - science
[anidulafungin, antifungal, human, regimen, hcme, candida, datum, model, neonate, effect]

Anidulafungin for neonatal hematogenous Candida meningoencephalitis: identification of candidate regimens for humans using a translational pharmacological approach.
Hematogenous Candida meningoencephalitis (HCME) is a serious infection in premature neonates. Anidulafungin is an echinocandin antifungal agent with potent activity against Candida spp., but its efficacy and optimal regimens for human neonates with HCME are not known. A well-validated rabbit model of HCME was used to define pharmacokinetic-pharmacodynamic (PK-PD) relationships of anidulafungin. A mathematical model was fitted to the entire data set. The experimental data were bridged to humans. A population PK model was fitted to the data from human neonates receiving anidulafungin receiving a loading dose of 3 mg/kg, followed by 1.5 mg/kg/day. Monte Carlo simulations were performed to identify candidate anidulafungin regimens for humans. All untreated rabbits succumbed by ≤96 h postinoculation. The PK of anidulafungin was linear with dose-dependent penetration into the cerebrum. Anidulafungin exerted a rapid antifungal effect that was apparent in the first dosing interval. Near-maximal antifungal activity was observed with dosages of 10 to 20 mg/kg/day. The bridging studies suggested that the current regimen of first 3 mg/kg, followed by 1.5 mg/kg/day, is suboptimal. Higher dosages were associated with progressively greater antifungal effect. Anidulafungin is effective for the treatment of experimental HCME. Higher dosages than those currently used for clinical care are required for maximal antifungal effect.
-------------------------------------

10007985_234 - 0.772238374956 - science
[binary, microlensing, dwarf, weak, ogle-2008-blg-510, brown, anomaly, detection, real-time, automated]

OGLE-2008-BLG-510: first automated real-time detection of a weak microlensing anomaly - brown dwarf or stellar binary?
DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2966.2012.21233.x; eprintid: arXiv:1203.1291
-------------------------------------

10003551_234 - 0.823858831287 - science
[iga, gene, microarray, experiment, class, interpretation, result, iterative, approach, analysis]

Iterative Group Analysis (iGA): A simple tool to enhance sensitivity and facilitate interpretation of microarray experiments
Background: The biological interpretation of even a simple microarray experiment can be a challenging and highly complex task. Here we present a new method (Iterative Group Analysis) to facilitate, improve, and accelerate this process. Results: Our Iterative Group Analysis approach (iGA) uses elementary statistics to identify those functional classes of genes that are significantly changed in an experiment and at the same time determines which of the class members are most likely to be differentially expressed. iGA does not require that all members of a class change and is therefore robust against imperfect class assignments, which can be derived from public sources (e.g. GeneOntologies) or automated processes (e.g. key word extraction from gene names). In contrast to previous non-iterative approaches, iGA does not depend on the availability of fixed lists of differentially expressed genes, and thus can be used to increase the sensitivity of gene detection especially in very noisy or small data sets. In the extreme, iGA can even produce statistically meaningful results without any experimental replication. The automated functional annotation provided by iGA greatly reduces the complexity of microarray results and facilitates the interpretation process. In addition, iGA can be used as a fast and efficient tool for the platform-independent comparison of a microarray experiment to the vast number of published results, automatically highlighting shared genes of potential interest. Conclusions: By applying iGA to a wide variety of data from diverse organisms and platforms we show that this approach enhances and accelerates the interpretation of microarray experiments. ?? 2004 Breitling et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd.
-------------------------------------

10017076_234 - 0.900689872674 - science
[skin, ageing, elastic]

A new wrinkle on old skin: the role of elastic fibres in skin ageing.
Synopsis Cutaneous ageing is the result of two distinct, biological processes which may occur concurrently: (i) the passage of time, termed intrinsic ageing and (ii) environmental influences, termed extrinsic ageing. Intrinsic ageing of the skin is a slow process which causes changes in tissue structure and impairs function in the absence of additional biological, chemical and physical factors. The clinical features of intrinsically aged skin are not usually evident until old age when, although smooth and unblemished, the skin surface appears pale and is characterized by fine wrinkles with occasional exaggerated expression lines. Functionally, intrinsically aged skin is dry and less elastic than more youthful skin. In contrast, extrinsically aged skin is exemplified by deep, coarse wrinkles, mottled hyperpigmentation and a marked loss of elasticity and recoil. The two major environmental influences which induce extrinsic ageing are: (i) chronic exposure to solar ultraviolet (UV) irradiation (termed photoageing) and (ii) smoking. This review discusses the changes associated with the ageing process in the skin, with particular emphasis on the role played by the elastic fibre network in maintaining dermal function. The review concludes with a discussion of a short-term assay for independent assessment of the efficacy of anti-ageing cosmetic products using the elastic fibre component fibrillin-1 as a biomarker of extracellular matrix repair.
-------------------------------------

10004145_234 - 0.886315594614 - science
[ncc, gut, neural, hscr, cell, migration, crest]

Balancing neural crest cell intrinsic processes with those of the microenvironment in Tcof1 haploinsufficient mice enables complete enteric nervous system formation.
The enteric nervous system (ENS) comprises a complex neuronal network that regulates peristalsis of the gut wall and secretions into the lumen. The ENS is formed from a multipotent progenitor cell population called the neural crest, which is derived from the neuroepithelium. Neural crest cells (NCCs) migrate over incredible distances to colonize the entire length of the gut and during their migration they must survive, proliferate and ultimately differentiate. The absence of an ENS from variable lengths of the colon results in Hirschsprung's disease (HSCR) or colonic aganglionosis. Mutations in about 12 different genes have been identified in HSCR patients but the complex pattern of inheritance and variable penetrance suggests that additional genes or modifiers must be involved in the etiology and pathogenesis of this disease. We discovered that Tcof1 haploinsufficiency in mice models many of the early features of HSCR. Neuroepithelial apoptosis diminished the size of the neural stem cell pool resulting in reduced NCC numbers and their delayed migration along the gut from E10.5 to E14.5. Surprisingly however, we observe continued and complete colonization of the entire colon throughout E14.5-E18.5, a period in which the gut is considered to be non- or less-permissive to NCC. Thus, we reveal for the first time that reduced NCC progenitor numbers and delayed migration do not unequivocally equate with a predisposition for the pathogenesis of HSCR. In fact, these deficiencies can be overcome by balancing NCC intrinsic processes of proliferation and differentiation with extrinsic influences of the gut microenvironment.
-------------------------------------

10011017_234 - 0.852824232351 - science
[implication, sorption, groundwater, ph, site, effect, mobility, strontium, ionic, aquifer]

Effect of groundwater pH and ionic strength on strontium sorption in aquifer sediments: Implications for 90Sr mobility at contaminated nuclear sites
cited By (since 1996) 0
-------------------------------------

10005275_234 - 0.832167781315 - science
[cell, matrix, nodule, remodeling, cord, expression, increase, force]

The mechanical environment in dupuytren's contracture determines cell contractility and associated MMP-mediated matrix remodeling.
Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are expressed in Dupuytren's contracture and play a role in matrix remodeling. We tested the role of tension on contractility and MMP expression in Dupuytren's nodule and cord cells. Cells were subjected to pre-determined loading patterns of known repeatable magnitudes (static load, unloading, and overloading) and tested for MMP gene expression (MMP-1, -2, -9, -13, and TIMP-1, -2) and force generation using a tension-culture force monitor. Matrix remodeling was assessed by addition of cytochalasin D and residual matrix tension was quantified. Nodule compared to cord and control cells demonstrate greater force generation and remodeling (p < 0.05). Nodule cells subjected to a reduced load and overloading led to threefold increase of MMP-1, -2, and -9 compared to static load, whilst cord and control cells only showed a twofold increase of MMP-9. Nodule cells subjected to overloading showed a twofold increase in TIMP-2 expression, whilst cord and control cells showed a twofold increase in TIMP-1 expression. Nodule cells differ from cord cells by increased force generation in response to changes in the mechanical environment and related MMP/TIMP-mediated matrix remodeling. In turn this may lead to permanent matrix shortening and digital contracture. Interventional therapies should be aimed at nodule cells to prevent contraction and subsequent permanent matrix remodeling. © 2012 Orthopaedic Research Society. Published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc. J Orthop Res.
-------------------------------------

10005288_234 - 0.91178186523 - science
[tendon, zone, cell, acellular, healing, suture, study, formation]

The cell biology of suturing tendons.
Trauma by suturing tendon form areas devoid of cells termed "acellular zones" in the matrix. This study aimed to characterise the cellular insult of suturing and acellular zone formation in mouse tendon. Acellular zone formation was evaluated using single grasping sutures placed using flexor tendons with time lapse cell viability imaging for a period of 12h. Both tension and injury were required to induce cell death and cell movement in the formation of the acellular zone. DNA fragmentation studies and transmission electron microscopy indicated that cells necrosed. Parallel in vivo studies showed that cell-to-cell contacts were disrupted following grasping by the suture in tensioned tendon. Without tension, cell death was lessened and cell-to-cell contacts remained intact. Quantitative immunohistochemistry and 3D cellular profile mapping of wound healing markers over a one year time course showed that acellular zones arise rapidly and showed no evidence of healing whilst the wound healing response occurred in the surrounding tissues. The acellular zones were also evident in a standard modified "Kessler" clinical repair. In conclusion, the suture repair of injured tendons produces acellular zones, which may potentially cause early tendon failure.
-------------------------------------

10009824_234 - 0.73832546684 - science
[animal, clotrimazole, combination, examination, treatment, guinea, culture, pig, clinical, infection]

Comparative in-vivo activity of clotrimazole and a clotrimazole/hydrocortisone combination in the treatment of experimental dermatophytosis in guinea pigs.
To compare the activity of clotrimazole with a clotrimazole/hydrocortisone combination, guinea pigs were infected with Trichophyton mentagrophytes var. mentagrophytes. The animals were treated with once daily application of clotrimazole alone, hydrocortisone alone, base alone or a combination of clotrimazole and hydrocortisone. One group of animals was left untreated. Daily clinical observations were made. At intervals during the three week study animals were killed, skin scrapings were taken for microscopical examination and culture and skin was removed for histological examination. The responses of the guinea pigs treated with the base alone reflected those of the untreated controls. They were mycologically positive throughout the study and showed extensive inflammatory reactions on histology. Animals treated with hydrocortisone alone rapidly developed a severe clinical infection and mycological examination was positive throughout. Animals treated with clotrimazole alone did not show severe clinical reactions and were negative on culture after four treatments; histology showed inflammatory scabs after resolution of infection. Clinically, the animals receiving combination therapy improved most quickly and cultures were negative after two treatments. Histological examination showed resolution of the infection and little inflammation.
-------------------------------------

10008192_234 - 0.840671401603 - science
[reactivity, chemical, allergen, respiratory, peptide, competitive, condition, selectivity, lysine, assay]

The selective peptide reactivity of chemical respiratory allergens under competitive and non-competitive conditions.
It is well established that certain chemicals cause respiratory allergy. In common with contact allergens, chemicals that induce sensitization of the respiratory tract must form stable associations with host proteins to elicit an immune response. Measurement of the reactivity of chemical allergens to single nucleophilic peptides is increasingly well-described, and standardized assays have been developed for use in hazard assessment. This study employed standard and modified peptide reactivity assays to investigate the selectivity of chemical respiratory allergens for individual amino acids under competitive and non-competitive conditions. The reactivity of 20 known chemical respiratory sensitizers (including diisocyanates, anhydrides, and reactive dyes) were evaluated for reactivity towards individual peptides containing cysteine, lysine, histidine, arginine, or tyrosine. Respiratory allergens exhibited the common ability to deplete both lysine and cysteine peptides; however, reactivity for histidine, arginine, and tyrosine varied between chemicals, indicating differences in relative binding affinity toward each nucleophile. To evaluate amino acid selectivity for cysteine and lysine under competitive conditions a modified assay was used in which reaction mixtures contained different relative concentrations of the target peptides. Under these reaction conditions, the binding preferences of reference respiratory and contact allergens (dinitrochlorobenzene, dinitrofluorobenzene) were evaluated. Discrete patterns of reactivity were observed showing various levels of competitive selectivity between the two allergen classes.
-------------------------------------

10018235_234 - 0.70433882442 - science
[organic, liquid, crystal, crystalline, development, semiconductor, nature, chap, field]

Columnar Liquid Crystalline Semiconductors
This is an exciting stage in the development of organic electronics. No longer is it an area of purely ‘academic interest’ but increasingly real applications are being developed and some of these are beginning to come on-stream. There have been several drivers for the surge of interest shown by the electronics industry. Perhaps the greatest is the promise afforded by organic systems for low-cost processing, e.g., methods of fabrication such as roll-to-roll contact printing or ink-jet printing in which the components are ‘assembled’ on low-cost substrates at room temperature. The long-term vision is for the creation of integrated devices in which, for example, a photovoltaic cell, a sensor and a display, all made of organic materials, is printed onto a plastic film in a single operation. Another factor in the recent development of organic electronics is the huge advances made in organic synthesis over the last half century, which make it easy to fine-tune the properties of organics at a molecular level in a way that is simply not possible for their metallic and semi-metallic counterparts. Finally, organics are much easier to interface with biomaterials, which is perhaps the key problem in the development of new generation biosensors. Another consideration in the development of organic electronics has been ‘Green Issues’: not only the need to develop energy-efficient methods of manufacture but also the need to develop methods based on renewable (organic) rather than finite (inorganic and metallic) components.Although it seems improbable that organics will ever compete with silicon-based devices in terms of high-end computing applications, where device speed is of the essence, there are many low-end areas of application, where we can look to see traditional inorganic components increasingly replaced by organics. Areas that have already been commercially developed or which are under intensive development include organic light emitting diodes (for flat panel displays and solid state lighting), organic photovoltaic cells, organic thin film transistors (for smart tags and flat panel displays) and sensors. Potentially this is a field that will affect every aspect of our lives and have an impact in every home and in every business.Within the family of organic electronic materials, liquid crystals are relative newcomers. The first electronically conducting liquid crystals were only reported in 1988, but already a substantial literature has developed. The potential advantage of liquid crystalline semiconductors is that they have the easy processabilty of amorphous and polymeric semiconductors, but they usually have higher charge carrier mobilities. Their mobilities do not reach the levels seen in crystalline organics, but they circumvent all of the difficult issues of controlling crystal growth and morphology. Liquid crystals self-organise, they can be aligned by fields and surface forces and, because of their fluid nature, defects in liquid crystal structures readily self-heal.Because this is a relatively young field, there are still issues which need to be understood. In particular, the theory of electronic conduction in liquid crystals is much less well developed than that of electronic conduction in other organic mate- rials and, although the relationship between molecular structure and conductivity is mostly understood, some issues still remain to be resolved and understood.With these matters in mind, this is an opportune moment to bring together a monograph on the subject of ‘Liquid Crystalline Semiconductors’. The field is already too large to cover in a comprehensive manner, so our aim has been to bring together contributions from leading workers, which cover the main areas of the chemistry (synthesis and structure/function relationships), physics and potential applications. A general introduction to liquid crystals and the nature and kinds of their mesomorphic behaviour and structure (mesophases) is given in Chap. 1. A description of the nature and mechanisms of different kinds of charge transport in calamitic (nematic and smectic) liquid crystalline semiconductors is given in Chap. 2 followed by a similar treatment of columnar (discotic) liquid crystalline semiconductors in Chap. 3. The different approaches and methods of determining charge transport in liquid crystals are also described in detail. Chap. 4 provides a comprehensive description of the synthesis of a wide range of columnar liquid crystalline semiconductors. A series of reaction schemes are used to illustrate different synthetic strategies and approaches to the synthesis of this special type of liquid crystal. Chapter 5 gives an extensive discussion of the nature and magnitude of charge transport in reactive mesogens (monomers) and how they are determined. A similar treatment of the corresponding liquid crystal polymer networks is also given in this chapter. An insight into the nature and complexity of the optical properties of liquid crystals is provided in Chap. 6. Chapters 7, 8 and 9 describe the modes of operation, configuration and performance of a range of electrooptic devices, i.e., organic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs), especially with polarised emission, organic photovoltaics and organic field-effect transistors, incorporating the types of liquid crystalline semiconductors described in the preceding chapters. Our hope is that this book will provide a useful introduction to the field both for those in industry and for those in academia and that it will help to stimulate future developments.
-------------------------------------

10005194_234 - 0.96441359993 - science
[adsorption, calcite, surface, different, uranyl, energy, free]

Atomistic Simulations of Calcium Uranyl(VI) Carbonate Adsorption on Calcite and Stepped-Calcite Surfaces
Adsorption of actinyl ions onto mineral surfaces is one of the main mechanisms that control the migration of these ions in environmental systems. Here, we present computational classical molecular dynamics (MD) simulations to investigate the behavior of U(VI) in contact with different calcite surfaces. The calcium-uranyl-carbonate Ca2UO2(CO3)(3) species is shown to display both inner and outer-sphere adsorption to the flat {10 (1) over bar4} and the stepped {31 (4) over bar8} and {3 (12) over bar 16} planes of calcite. Free energy calculations, using the umbrella sampling method, are employed to simulate adsorption paths of the same uranyl species on the different calcite surfaces under aqueous condition. Outer-sphere adsorption is found to dominate over inner-sphere adsorption because of the high free energy barrier of removing a uranyl-carbonate interaction and replacing it with a new uranyl-surface interaction. An important bin monolayer between the surface and the sorbed complex. From the free complex was also found to adsorb preferentially on the acute-stepped ding mode is proposed involving a single vicinal water energy profiles of the different Calcite surfaces, the uranyl {31 (4) over bar8} face of calcite, in agreement with experiment.
-------------------------------------

10018314_234 - 0.904483423221 - science
[bacterial, inflammatory, innate, lung, immune, negative]

The innate immune rheostat: influence on lung inflammatory disease and secondary bacterial pneumonia.
The activity of innate immunity is not simply dictated by the presence of an antigen but also by the balance between negative regulatory and immune potentiator pathways. Even in the absence of antigen, innate immunity can 'inflame' if negative regulators are absent. This resting state is adaptable and dictated by environmental influences, host genetics and past infection history. A return to homoeostasis post inflammation may therefore not leave the tissue in an identical state to that prior to the inflammatory event. This adaptability makes us all unique and also explains the variable outcome experienced by a diverse population to the same inflammatory stimulus. Using murine models we have identified that influenza virus causes a long-term modification of the lung microenvironment by a de-sensitization to bacterial products and an increase in the myeloid negative regulator CD200R (CD200 receptor). These two events prevent subsequent inflammatory damage while the lung is healing, but also they may predispose to bacterial colonization of the lower respiratory tract should regulatory mechanisms overshoot. In the extreme, this leads to bacterial pneumonia, sepsis and death. A deeper understanding of the consequences arising from innate immune cell alteration during influenza infection and the subsequent development of bacterial complications has important implications for future drug development.
-------------------------------------

10007557_234 - 0.749390940207 - science
[melanoma, thin, tumor, patient, survival, 20-year, mm, invasive, queensland]

Population-Based 20-Year Survival Among People Diagnosed With Thin Melanomas in Queensland, Australia
PURPOSE: The 20-year survival rates are unknown for the majority of melanoma patients-those with thin melanomas. We determined 20-year survival rates of patients diagnosed with thin melanomas (≤ 1.00 mm) in the general population and also determined the main prognostic factors. PATIENTS AND METHODS: Available clinical and histologic data from the Queensland Cancer Registry were obtained for all patients diagnosed with a single thin invasive melanoma from 1982 to 2006 and matched against national death registration data. Melanoma-specific survival estimates to December 31, 2007, were assessed, and subgroup differences in prognosis were determined by fitting multivariate Cox proportional hazard models. RESULTS: Among 26,736 people in the state of Queensland diagnosed with thin melanomas, the 20-year survival was 96%. The most influential determinants of prognosis were tumor thickness ≥ 0.75 mm (adjusted hazard ratio HR, 4.33; 95% CI, 2.8 to 6.8 compared with tumors < 0.25 mm) and patient age at diagnosis older than 65 years (HR, 2.8; 95% CI, 1.8 to 4.5) compared with age younger than 25 years. Acral lentiginous and nodular tumors, male sex, tumor site on the scalp or neck, or tumor invasion of the entire papillary dermis each independently increased the risk of dying from thin invasive melanoma. CONCLUSION: The outlook for patients with thin invasive melanoma is positive, although continued clinical vigilance is warranted for patients with nodular melanoma and those with the thickest tumors.
-------------------------------------

10003265_234 - 0.891675921237 - science
[human, antioxidant, octa, defence, melanocyte, novel, skin, melanogenesis]

2,4,6-Octatrienoic acid is a novel promoter of melanogenesis and antioxidant defence in normal human melanocytes via PPAR-γ activation.
Given the importance of the tanning response in protecting human skin from the harmful effects of UV radiation, one important research priority is to identify novel molecules that are capable of promoting pigmentation and/or antioxidant defence. Parrodienes share some structural features with carotenoids and retinoids, stimulate cell antioxidant defence and counteract senescence-like phenotype in fibroblasts. We selected the parrodiene-derivative 2,4,6-octatrienoic acid (Octa) to study its impact on key parameters of melanogenesis and antioxidant defence in organ-cultured human skin and in normal human melanocytes. Octa promoted melanogenesis by up-regulating tyrosinase and microphthalmia-associated transcription factor expression. This correlated with an increase of melanin content in both human epidermis in situ and cultured human epidermal melanocytes. Moreover, Octa increased the biological antioxidant potential content and the expression and activity of catalase. Activation of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR)-γ was necessary to evoke these effects. These data strongly encourage the systematic study of Octa as a novel candidate promoter of human skin photoprotection.
-------------------------------------

10018377_234 - 0.75453566711 - science
[lung, inflammatory, macrophage, cd200, cd200r, infection, immune, influenza]

A critical function for CD200 in lung immune homeostasis and the severity of influenza infection
The lung must maintain a high threshold of immune 'ignorance' to innocuous antigens to avoid inflammatory disease that depends on the balance of positive inflammatory signals and repressor pathways. We demonstrate here that airway macrophages had higher expression of the negative regulator CD200 receptor (CD200R) than did their systemic counterparts. Lung macrophages were restrained by CD200 expressed on airway epithelium. Mice lacking CD200 had more macrophage activity and enhanced sensitivity to influenza infection, which led to delayed resolution of inflammation and, ultimately, death. The administration of agonists that bind CD200R, however, prevented inflammatory lung disease. Thus, CD200R is critical for lung macrophage immune homeostasis in the resting state and limits inflammatory amplitude and duration during pulmonary influenza infection.
-------------------------------------

10008865_234 - 0.736523273951 - science
[chemical, respiratory, allergen, skin, peptide, reactivity, dpra]

The direct Peptide reactivity assay: selectivity of chemical respiratory allergens.
It is well known that some chemicals are capable of causing allergic diseases of the skin and respiratory tract. Commonly, though not exclusively, chemical allergens are associated with the selective development of skin or respiratory sensitization. The reason for this divergence is unclear, although it is hypothesized that the nature of interactions between the chemical hapten and proteins is influential. The direct peptide reactivity assay (DPRA) has been developed as a screen for the identification of skin-sensitizing chemicals, and here we describe the use of this method to explore whether differences exist between skin and respiratory allergens with respect to their peptide-binding properties. Known skin and respiratory sensitizers were reacted with synthetic peptides containing either lysine (Lys) or cysteine (Cys) for 24h. The samples were analyzed by HPLC/UV, and the loss of peptide from the reaction mixture was expressed as the percent depletion compared with the control. The potential for preferential reactivity was evaluated by comparing the ratio of Lys to Cys depletion (Lys:Cys ratio). The results demonstrate that the majority of respiratory allergens are reactive in the DPRA, and that in contrast to most skin-sensitizing chemicals, preferentially react with the Lys peptide. These data suggest that skin and respiratory chemical allergens can result in different protein conjugates, which may in turn influence the quality of induced immune responses. Overall, these investigations reveal that the DPRA has considerable potential to be incorporated into tiered testing approaches for the identification and characterization of chemical respiratory allergens.
-------------------------------------

10017182_234 - 0.921219606672 - science
[phagocytosis, neutrophil, il-8, conidium, fmlp, increase, chemoattractant]

Stimulation of neutrophil phagocytosis of Aspergillus fumigatus conidia by interleukin-8 and N-formylmethionyl-leucylphenylalanine.
The effect of the chemoattractants, interleukin-8 (IL-8) and N-formylmethionyl-leucylphenylalanine (fmlp) on neutrophil phagocytosis of serum-opsonised Aspergillus fumigatus conidia were studied. Pre-exposure of neutrophil monolayers to IL-8 (10-100 ng ml-1) or fmlp (10(-6)M) for 20 min increased phagocytosis from 15% to 35%. Furthermore, there was a significant increase in the numbers of conidia ingested by active neutrophils. The chemoattractants did not enhance phagocytosis of conidia when added contemporaneously to neutrophil monolayers. The ability of each chemoattractant to act as a primer for the other was investigated. It was found that fmlp could prime for IL-8 and fmlp enhancement of phagocytosis, but IL-8 could not. An increase from 15% to 55% in phagocytosis was seen at a pre-exposure concentration of 10(-5) M fmlp followed by an incubation period of 30 min in the presence of 20 ng ml-1 IL-8. There was no significant increase in the average number of internalized conidia under these conditions. The response of human neutrophils to priming stimuli may have important implications in the pathogenesis of aspergillosis.
-------------------------------------

10009567_234 - 0.807616463922 - science
[rfm, placental, fetal, placenta, structure, woman, function, movement, insufficiency, maternal]

Maternal perception of reduced fetal movements is associated with altered placental structure and function.
BACKGROUND: Maternal perception of reduced fetal movement (RFM) is associated with increased risk of stillbirth and fetal growth restriction (FGR). DFM is thought to represent fetal compensation to conserve energy due to insufficient oxygen and nutrient transfer resulting from placental insufficiency. To date there have been no studies of placental structure in cases of DFM. OBJECTIVE: To determine whether maternal perception of reduced fetal movements (RFM) is associated with abnormalities in placental structure and function. DESIGN: Placentas were collected from women with RFM after 28 weeks gestation if delivery occurred within 1 week. Women with normal movements served as a control group. Placentas were weighed and photographs taken. Microscopic structure was evaluated by immunohistochemical staining and image analysis. System A amino acid transporter activity was measured as a marker of placental function. Placentas from all pregnancies with RFM (irrespective of outcome) had greater area with signs of infarction (3.5% vs. 0.6%; p<0.01), a higher density of syncytial knots (p<0.001) and greater proliferation index (p<0.01). Villous vascularity (p<0.001), trophoblast area (p<0.01) and system A activity (p<0.01) were decreased in placentas from RFM compared to controls irrespective of outcome of pregnancy. CONCLUSIONS: This study provides evidence of abnormal placental morphology and function in women with RFM and supports the proposition of a causal association between placental insufficiency and RFM. This suggests that women presenting with RFM require further investigation to identify those with placental insufficiency.
-------------------------------------

10011024_234 - 0.74844291598 - science
[impacted, behaviour, strontium, nitrate, precipitation, bioreduction, sorption, sediment]

Strontium sorption and precipitation behaviour during bioreduction in nitrate impacted sediments
cited By (since 1996) 1
-------------------------------------

10008099_234 - 0.838018945568 - science
[glucose, concentration, placental, culture, assay, structure, function]

A high-throughput colorimetric-assay for monitoring glucose consumption by cultured trophoblast cells and placental tissue.
Diabetes mellitus is associated with abnormalities in placental structure and function and significant pregnancy complications. In vitro studies to investigate the effect of hyperglycaemia on trophoblast structure and function require an accurate, inexpensive and reliable assay to monitor the concentration of glucose in culture medium. We have modified and validated an existing protocol for use with a 96-well microplate. This provides a specific, high-throughput assay which accurately measures culture media glucose concentrations between 7 and 30 mM, without spectral interferences by phenol red or sera. Use of this assay revealed that the concentration of glucose in BeWo cell cultures remains stable for 48 h. In contrast placental explants rapidly consume glucose thus the concentration in culture media significantly decreases over 12 h necessitating more frequent replenishment in order to maintain the desired concentration. We therefore advise researchers to monitor glucose concentrations in in vitro investigations modelling the effect of diabetes mellitus on placental structure and function.
-------------------------------------

10009745_234 - 0.844642307795 - science
[oricult-n, vaginal, yeast, method, control, group]

Evaluation of the Oricult-N dipslide for laboratory diagnosis of vaginal candidiasis.
The Oricult-N semiquantitative dipslide (Orion Diagnostica, Espoo, Finland) was evaluated for the laboratory diagnosis of vaginal candidiasis. It was compared with broth culture (Vagicult; Orion Diagnostica). Oricult-N was positive for 14.5% of 124 symptomatic patients and 12% of 50 asymptomatic controls. The results for broth cultures were 17 and 22%, respectively. Thus, the test group and the control group did not differ significantly by either method. High vaginal yeast counts (>/=10(5) CFU/ml) were detected by Oricult-N in 7% of patients and in 0% of controls, but both groups harbored low numbers of yeasts. An accurate quantitative cutoff point separating a level of yeast associated with infection from vaginal yeast carriage could not be defined in the study. Nevertheless, the easy semiquantitation allowed by the Oricult-N method could be helpful because, especially in low-count carriers of Candida, other potential causes of vaginal symptoms should be considered. The Oricult-N method was technically simple and could be applied in primary health care. Further studies are required, however, before Oricult-N can be recommended as a routine diagnostic tool.
-------------------------------------

10012728_234 - 0.921704030765 - science
[diffraction, reaction, hydrothermal, phase, synchrotron, study, cement, synthesis, dispersive, kinetics]

Hydrothermal synthesis of cement phases: An in situ synchrotron, energy dispersive diffraction study of reaction kinetics and mechanisms
cited By (since 1996) 1
-------------------------------------

10005295_234 - 0.909406016523 - science
[concentration, fibrinogen, thrombin, fibrin, clot, rigidity, phase, salt, blood, sample]

Rheological Properties of Fibrin Clots
A study of the rheological properties of fibrin, an important coagulant in human haemostasis, is presented in this MPhil thesis. Fibrin monomers are activated at the site of an injury to a blood vessel through the thrombin-induced cleavage of fibrinogen, a protein which circulates in the blood. These monomers self-assemble into networks by branching out and connecting with each other. This is the process which gives rise to a blood clot. There are a variety of factors which have an influence on the structure of the fibrin network, which in turn have an influence on the physical properties of the clot. The influence of two of these factors, fibrinogen concentration and thrombin concentration, is investigated in this paper. The motivation for this work is the need to determine what makes a perfect blood clot, and to find out if increasing the concentration of fibrinogen or thrombin increases the long-term stability of clots. Previous research has highlighted some of the remarkable rheological properties of this material, namely by frequency-dependent experiments. In this work frequency-independent measurements of the time evolution of fibrin clot rigidity, and how this is related to the concentration of thrombin and fibrinogen, are presented. Measurements were taken using a Bohlin Gemini HR Nano Rheometer over a period of 16 hours. Samples were prepared with Tris-EDTA buffer, both with the addition of salt and without, either with a fixed concentration of thrombin and varying fibrinogen, or with a fixed concentration of fibrinogen and varying thrombin. It was found that the time evolution of the rigidity exhibited three separate phases, characterised by a steady increase in rigidity, followed by a sharp increase, and ending with a plateau, during which rigidity ceased to increase. Samples prepared with a higher concentration of thrombin or fibrinogen exhibited an increase in rigidity in the first phase, but this behaviour is not observed after the first phase. Consistent with previous research, it was determined that the clotting time of fibrin decreases with increasing concentration of thrombin or fibrinogen. This effect is also observed when salt is added to the Tris-EDTA buffer. The addition of salt was also found to have an effect on the long-term stability of clots, as the rigidity of samples prepared with salt experienced a sharp decline in the third phase. This can be related to the structure of fibrin, and the findings in this work can be used to help increase our understanding of how to make a perfect clot.
-------------------------------------

10012735_234 - 0.937168436678 - science
[hsd7, reductase, 3-ketosteroid, dehydrogenase]

17beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 7 - An ancient 3-ketosteroid reductase of cholesterogenesis
17??-hydroxysterold dehydrogenase type 7 (17??-HSD7) is a novel estrogenic hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase from mammals. We modeled the three-dimensional structure of human 17??-HSD7, analyzed the phylogeny of 17??-HSD7 homologues and determined its expression pattern by in silico Northern blotting. Predominant expression is found not only in reproductive tissues (breast, ovary, placenta) but also in liver and developing brain, principal sites of cholesterol synthesis. The substrate binding pocket is opening towards a conserved membrane-associated helix, which is indicative for a conversion of a membrane component. 17??-HSD7 shows significant homology to a yeast 3-ketosteroid reductase (ERG27) involved in ergosterol biosynthesis. Our results lead to the conclusion that 17??-HSD7 is not only involved in estradiol production but plays another (and possibly more important) role as a 3-ketosteroid reductase in cholesterogenesis. This agrees with the striking absence of 17??-HSD7 homologues in the complete genomes of Drosophila and C. elegans which are both auxotrophic for cholesterol. Copyright ?? 2001 Elsevier Science Ireland Ltd.
-------------------------------------

10014522_234 - 0.912694991947 - science
[exciton]

Systematic reduction of the permanent exciton dipole for charged excitons in individual self-assembled InGaAs quantum dots
Times Cited: 1 11th International Conference on Modulated Semiconductor Structures (MSS11) JUL 14-18, 2003 Nara, JAPAN
-------------------------------------

10005547_234 - 0.888129536398 - science
[difference, lymphocyte, crohn, transformation, antigen, disease, specific]

Lymphocyte transformation to specific antigens associated with Crohn's disease.
Specific lymphocyte transformation to three micro-organisms that have been implicated in Crohn's disease was performed. These were Pseudomonas maltophilia, Mycobacterium kansasii and Rotavirus. No significant differences were observed for any of the antigens tested. Simultaneous testing of nonspecific stimulation by PHA also showed no difference between patients and controls. These results do not support an aetiological role for these organisms mediated by a purely cellular mechanism.
-------------------------------------

10010288_234 - 0.797171712466 - science
[inhibitor, aromatase, response, metastatic, patient, cancer, polymorphism, cyp19a1, breast]

Polymorphisms of CYP19A1 and response to aromatase inhibitors in metastatic breast cancer patients
IF 2010 4.859
-------------------------------------

10011089_234 - 0.841482087335 - science
[carbonate, acc, calcite, amorphous, mechanism, vaterite, calcium, kinetics, crystallization]

The kinetics and mechanisms of amorphous calcium carbonate (ACC) crystallization to calcite, via vaterite
cited By (since 1996) 22
-------------------------------------

10005453_234 - 0.869823734083 - science
[hair, matrix, human, property, hydrophobic, modification, effect]

The effects of hydrophobic modifications on the interaction of human hair with water
Human hair, like other α-keratinous fibres, is a highly complex biomaterial. For the analysis of its mechanical properties it is, however, well described by a two-phase structure, which contains as morphological components the highly-ordered, crystalline intermediate filaments (IFs) and the less-ordered, amorphous matrix. The presence of elastic IFs alongside the viscous matrix, results in the viscoelastic properties exhibited by human hair.
Previous studies have shown that wool has a higher glass transition temperature, Tg, than human hair despite a higher content of the hydrophobic, high glycine-tyrosine (HGT) proteins contained within the matrix. On this basis the ‘internal plasticization hypothesis’ was developed, stating that the HGT-proteins in hair have a specific plasticization effect in the matrix. To investigate this hypothesis, hydrophobic modifications of the matrix proteins have been carried out and their effects on the thermal properties of the hair analysed. During the first stage of the investigations it was shown that, hydrophobic modifications by esterification lead to substantial changes of the humidity-dependent glass transition of human hair.
The disulphide linkages, which are predominantly located in the matrix, play an important role for the stability of a hair fibre. In this work, the disulphide linkages have been reduced and subsequently methylated and both the thermal and mechanical properties analysed. First results are reported for this second stage of the investigations.
-------------------------------------

10005626_234 - 0.722408628489 - science
[hypnosis, motility, colonic, effect, rate, emotion, physiological, change]

Physiological effects of emotion: assessment via hypnosis.
Assessment of the physiological effects of physical and emotional stress has been hampered by a lack of suitable laboratory techniques. Since hypnosis can be used safely to induce specific emotional states of considerable intensity, we studied the effect on distal colonic motility of three hypnotically induced emotions (excitement, anger, and happiness) in 18 patients aged 20-48 years with irritable bowel syndrome. Colonic motility index was reduced by hypnosis on its own (mean change 19.1; 95% CI 0.8, 37.3; p less than 0.05) and this change was accompanied by decreases in both pulse (12; 8, 15) and respiration (6; 4, 8) rates (p less than 0.001 for both). Anger and excitement increased the colonic motility index (50.8; 29.4, 72.2; and 30.4; 8.9, 51.9, respectively; p less than 0.01 for both), pulse rate (26; 22, 30; and 28; 24, 32; p less than 0.001 for both), and respiration rate (14; 12, 16; and 12; 10, 14; p less than 0.001 for both). Happiness further reduced colonic motility although not significantly from that observed during hypnosis alone. Changes in motility were mainly due to alterations in rate than in amplitude of contractions. Our results indicate that hypnosis may help in the investigation of the effects of emotion on physiological functions; this approach could be useful outside the gastrointestinal system. Our observation that hypnosis strikingly reduces fasting colonic motility may partly explain the beneficial effects of this form of therapy in functional bowel disorders.
-------------------------------------

10007012_234 - 0.769531786236 - science
[aerosol, equilibrium, partitioning, gas-aerosol, model, nitrate, ammonium, altitude]

Modelling the partitioning of ammonium nitrate in the convective boundary layer
An explanatory model study is presented on semi-volatile secondary inorganic aerosols on three clear days in May 2008 during the IMPACT campaign at the Cabauw tower in the Netherlands. A single column model in combination with the equilibrium aerosol model ISORROPIA is used. This model uses surface observations from IMPACT and calculates the gas-aerosol partitioning of ammonium nitrate. The calculated gas-aerosol equilibrium overestimates the gas phase fraction during daytime, and overestimates the aerosol phase fraction during night-time. This discrepancy can partly be solved when the approach of the gas-aerosol equilibrium is forced to proceed with a delay timescale of up to two hours. Although it is shown that the delay itself has a small effect, the most important effect is caused by the mixing of air from higher altitudes at which the equilibrium is shifted to the aerosol phase. Thus, vertical mixing is shown to have a significant influence on the calculated partitioning at the surface. On some occasions, the correspondence to the observed partitioning improves dramatically. </br > Even though gas-aerosol partitioning of ammonium nitrate is not instantaneous, observations show that a different equilibrium in the upper boundary layer causes aerosol ammonium nitrate concentrations to increase with altitude. Our model calculates similar vertical gradients depending on the assumed speed of gas-aerosol equilibrium. The calculated optical properties of the aerosol show a similar behaviour. The aerosol optical properties depend on the aerosol size distribution both directly, because light scattering depends on particle size, and indirectly, because the equilibration timescale depends on the aerosol sizes. Future studies should therefore focus on a fully size-resolved treatment of the gas-aerosol partitioning. </br > Finally, coarser-resolution models may treat the gas-aerosol equilibrium of ammonium nitrate by calculating the equilibrium with a temperature and humidity sampled at a different altitude. We found that the equilibrium at an altitude of 200 m (night) up to 600 m (day) is representative for the partitioning of ammonium nitrate at the surface in the beginning of May 2008.
-------------------------------------

10017171_234 - 0.921512875243 - science
[psidin, olfactory, neuron, formation, number, axon, circuit, defect, natb, dnaa20]

Drosophila Psidin regulates olfactory neuron number and axon targeting through two distinct molecular mechanisms
The formation of neuronal circuits is a key process of development, laying foundations for behavior. The cellular mechanisms regulating circuit development are not fully understood. Here, we reveal Psidin as an intracellular regulator of Drosophila olfactory system formation. We show that Psidin is required in several classes of olfactory receptor neurons (ORNs) for survival and subsequently for axon guidance. During axon guidance, Psidin functions as an actin regulator and antagonist of Tropomyosin. Accordingly, Psidin-deficient primary neurons in culture display growth cones with significantly smaller lamellipodia. This lamellipodial phenotype as well as the mistargeting defects in vivo are suppressed by parallel removal of Tropomyosin. In contrast, Psidin functions as the non-catalytic subunit of the N-acetyltransferase complex NatB to maintain the number of ORNs. Psidin physically binds the catalytic NatB subunit CG14222 (dNAA20) and functionally interacts with it in vivo. We define the dNAA20 interaction domain within Psidin and identify a conserved serine as a candidate for phosphorylation-mediated regulation of NatB complex formation. A phosphomimetic mutation of this serine showed severely reduced binding to dNAA20 in vitro. In vivo, it fully rescued the targeting defect, but not the reduction in neuron numbers. In addition, we show that a different amino acid point mutation shows exactly the opposite effect by rescuing only the cell number but not the axon targeting defect. Taken together, our data suggest that Psidin plays two independent developmental roles via the acquisition of separate signaling pathways both of which contribute to the formation of olfactory circuits.

PubMed: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23152593
-------------------------------------

10006930_234 - 0.811239594707 - science
[light, photoreceptor, retinal, clock, response, melanopsin, iprgc]

How rod, cone, and melanopsin photoreceptors come together to enlighten the mammalian circadian clock.
In mammals, a small number of retinal ganglion cells express melanopsin, an opsin photopigment, allowing them to be directly photoreceptive. A major function of these so-called intrinsically photosensitive retinal ganglion cells (ipRGCs) is to synchronize (entrain) endogenous circadian clocks to the external light:dark cycle. Thanks to their intrinsic light response, ipRGCs can support photoentrainment even when the other retinal photoreceptors (rods and cones) are absent or inactive. However, in the intact retina the ipRGC light response is a composite of extrinsic (rod/cone) and intrinsic (melanopsin) influences. As a result all three photoreceptor classes contribute to the retinal pathways providing light information to the clock. Here, we consider what each photoreceptor type contributes to the clock light response. We review electrophysiological and behavioral data pertinent to this question, primarily from laboratory rodents, drawing them together to provide a conceptual model in which each photoreceptor class plays a distinct role in encoding the light environment. We finally use this model to highlight some of the important outstanding questions in this field.
-------------------------------------

10018366_234 - 0.881743544659 - science
[cell, eosinophilia, ox40, ox40l, neoforman]

OX40 ligation on activated T cells enhances the control of Cryptococcus neoformans and reduces pulmonary eosinophilia.
Pulmonary eosinophilia induced in C57BL/6 mice after Cryptococcus neoformans infection is driven by CD4(+) Th2 cells. The immunological mechanisms that protect against eosinophilia are not fully understood. Interaction of OX40 (CD134) and its ligand, OX40L, has been implicated in T cell activation and cell migration. Unlike CD28, OX40 is only expressed on T cells 1-2 days after Ag activation. Manipulation of this pathway would therefore target recently activated T cells, leaving the naive repertoire unaffected. In this study, we show that engagement of OX40 by an OX40L:Ig fusion protein drives IFN-gamma production by CD4(+) T cells and reduces eosinophilia and C. neoformans burden in the lung. Using gene-depleted mice, we show that reduction of eosinophilia and pathogen burden requires IL-12 and/or IFN-gamma. C. neoformans infection itself only partially induces OX40L expression by APCs. Provision of exogenous OX40L reveals a critical role of this pathway in the prevention of C. neoformans-induced eosinophilia.
-------------------------------------

10009815_234 - 0.925576609873 - science
[neutrophil, intracellular, phagocytosis, gm-csf, albican, cell]

Enhanced phagocytosis and intracellular killing of Candida albicans by GM-CSF-activated human neutrophils.
Little is known about effector cell modulation regarding phagocytosis and candidacidal activities of human neutrophils in response to granulocyte-macrophage colony stimulating factor (GM-CSF). In neutrophil monolayer assays, pre-treatment of cells with ultrapure GM-CSF at 40 Units ml-1 for a minimum of 1 h showed a significant enhancement of phagocytosis of Candida albicans (phagocytic index of 2.6 compared with 1.6 for unactivated neutrophils) after a 20 min ingestion period (P < 0.001). By counting viable colonies 50% of intracellular yeast cells were killed by non-activated neutrophils following internalization for 2 h. Neutrophils activated for 2 h with 40 Units ml-1 of GM-CSF killed 90% of intracellular blastoconidia (P < 0.02). These results demonstrate that in in vitro assays GM-CSF enhances phagocytosis and intracellular killing of C. albicans.
-------------------------------------

10008604_234 - 0.749298503456 - science
[ige, assay, method, allergen-specific, allergen, detection]

Detection of Allergen-Specific IgE Antibody Responses.
Allergen-specific IgE production is the central event in the pathogenesis of atopic disorders and increases in specific IgE serum antibodies are an indicator of immediate hypersensitivity responses in humans and in animal models of allergy. Consequently, accurate and user-friendly methods are needed to measure serum levels of allergen-specific IgE. This review examines historical and recent developments in in vivo and in vitro methods for the detection of allergen-specific IgE in humans and in animal models. Routinely, in vitro methods such as enzyme-linked immunosorbant assays or radioallergosorbant tests and in vivo methods such as the skin prick test (SPT) for humans and the passive cutaneous anaphylaxis assay (PCA) used in animals are utilized to detect allergen-specific IgE. While in vivo assays are usually more accurate than in vitro assays since they provide a functional readout of IgE activity, they are relatively costly and require considerable expertise. On the other hand in vitro assays are limited by the fact that the amount of allergen-specific serum IgG exceeds IgE antibody by several orders of magnitude, resulting in competition for allergen binding. Consequently, methods that use allergen as a direct capture step are limited by the availability of free allergen binding sites for IgE. In order to circumvent this problem, in vitro methods usually require prior depletion of IgG or use high amounts of allergen in order to facilitate availability of free binding sites for IgE detection. Clearly, these approaches are limited for small sample volumes and allergens that are in short supply. New methods such as protein microarray could potentially overcome this problem by providing high allergen concentrations in a relatively small reaction volume. Currently, in vitro methods are rarely used in isolation for prognosis but are used primarily to complement the information obtained from in vivo assays. With the emergence of new technologies it is conceivable that in vitro assays may in the future replace in vivo assays, however until then in vivo assays remain the gold standard of allergen-specific IgE detection.
-------------------------------------

10005266_234 - 0.795143872474 - science
[collagen, keloid, site, passage, fibroblast, cell, extralesional, tissue, scar, level]

Fibroblasts from the growing margin of keloid scars produce higher levels of collagen I and III compared with intralesional and extralesional sites: clinical implications for lesional site-directed therapy.
BACKGROUND: Overproduction of collagen and its abnormal assembly are hallmarks of keloid scars. Type I/III collagen ratios are altered in keloids compared with normal skin. Fibroblasts from different sites in keloid tissue, perilesional compared with intralesional and extralesional sites, show differential apoptosis and contraction. Additionally, early vs. later cell culture passages display differential collagen expression. We therefore hypothesize that keloid fibroblasts from the growing margin of the keloid express higher levels of collagen type I and III, and that collagen production is altered by extended cell culture passage. OBJECTIVES: (i) To measure collagen I and III at mRNA and protein levels quantitatively in keloid fibroblasts, growth media and tissue sections; and (ii) to perform tissue staining for collagen I and III expression in different lesional sites. METHODS: Keloid fibroblast cultures from intralesional, perilesional and extralesional sites (n = 8 separate keloid cases, yielding 64 biopsy samples) were established from passage 0 to passage 3. Collagen I and III mRNA was quantified using quantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction. We also measured the protein levels quantitatively by developing a highly specific and sensitive capture sandwich enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. A novel in-cell Western blotting was carried out in addition to haematoxylin and eosin and Herovici staining on keloid tissue sections for collagen I and III. RESULTS: Collagen types I and III were significantly higher (P < 0·03) in fibroblasts from the growing margin (perilesional site) compared with extralesional and intralesional keloid biopsy sites. As the passage number increased, the amount of collagen I significantly (P < 0·05) decreased and the collagen I/III ratio also decreased. CONCLUSIONS: Our data show that cells from the growing margin of keloid scars have a higher production of collagen I and III compared with other lesional sites. Additionally, temporal extension of cell passage affects collagen production. Clinically these findings may influence selection and interpretation of extended cell passage and provide future direction for lesional site-specific therapy in keloid scars.
-------------------------------------

10007584_234 - 0.822222508302 - science
[times, millimetric, intensity, concordia, emission, dome, atmospheric, cited, wavelength, polarization]

Intensity and polarization of the atmospheric emission at millimetric wavelengths at Dome Concordia
Times Cited: 1
-------------------------------------

10006929_234 - 0.816375349783 - science
[opsin, optogenetic, jellyop, tool, rod, light]

Reproducible and sustained regulation of Gαs signalling using a metazoan opsin as an optogenetic tool.
Originally developed to regulate neuronal excitability, optogenetics is increasingly also used to control other cellular processes with unprecedented spatiotemporal resolution. Optogenetic modulation of all major G-protein signalling pathways (Gq, Gi and Gs) has been achieved using variants of mammalian rod opsin. We show here that the light response driven by such rod opsin-based tools dissipates under repeated exposure, consistent with the known bleaching characteristics of this photopigment. We continue to show that replacing rod opsin with a bleach resistant opsin from Carybdea rastonii, the box jellyfish, (JellyOp) overcomes this limitation. Visible light induced high amplitude, reversible, and reproducible increases in cAMP in mammalian cells expressing JellyOp. While single flashes produced a brief cAMP spike, repeated stimulation could sustain elevated levels for 10s of minutes. JellyOp was more photosensitive than currently available optogenetic tools, responding to white light at irradiances ≥1 µW/cm(2). We conclude that JellyOp is a promising new tool for mimicking the activity of Gs-coupled G protein coupled receptors with fine spatiotemporal resolution.
-------------------------------------

10014432_234 - 0.801898837755 - science
[candida, pcr, sample, spp, granuloma, occurrence, periapical, albican, product, dna]

Examination on Candida spp. in refractory periapical granulomas.
AIM: To examine the occurrence of Candida spp. in refractory periapical granulomas. METHODOLOGY: One hundred and three surgically removed periapical granulomas were subjected to molecular analysis for the occurrence of Candida albicans. DNA was extracted from the samples using a modified phenol/chloroform/isoamyl alcohol method and was subjected to polymerase chain reaction (PCR) with OPA-03 and repetitive sequence (GACA)4 primers. The PCR products were separated in agarose gel electrophoresis, stained with ethidium bromide, visualized using UV light and the sequences were analysed. Samples indicating possible occurrence of Candida were further investigated by histological and immunohistological methods. Periodic acid-Shiff staining (PAS) was used to detect yeast cells and hyphae, and specific monoclonal antibodies to recognize high molecular mass mannoproteins present in the C. albicans cell wall. DNA extraction was controlled by running PCR using beta-actin primers (a housekeeping gene). C. albicans CCUG19915, C. tropicalis ATCC750, C. krusei ATCC6258, C. guilliermondii ATCC6260 and C. glabrata CCUG32725 served as positive controls in PCR. A tissue preparation of chronic atrophic candidosis in oral buccal mucosa served as a positive control for histological and immunohistological examinations. RESULTS: Polymerase chain reaction with beta-actin primers indicated successful DNA extraction in 68 out of 103 samples. The majority of the samples (50) were negative whereas 18 of the samples showed PCR products indicating possible occurrence of Candida spp. PAS-staining and immunohistological examination of these samples were, however, negative. Further analysis of the PCR products revealed sequences not typical for Candida spp. CONCLUSIONS: Candida spp. do not seem to occur in periapical granuloma.
-------------------------------------

10015755_234 - 0.777147580637 - science
[neurodevelopmental, brain, process, evidence, illness, transition, early, structural, factor, imaging]

Structural brain imaging evidence for multiple pathological processes at different stages of brain development in schizophrenia.
The underlying neurobiology of emerging psychotic disorders is not well understood. While there is evidence from structural imaging and other studies supporting the popular notion that schizophrenia arises as a consequence of an "early neurodevelopmental" lesion, more recent findings challenge this notion. Evidence, including our own data, suggests that dynamic brain changes occur during the earliest stages of a psychotic illness, including around the time of transition to illness. In this article we review the available longitudinal and relevant cross-sectional structural neuroimaging studies focusing on both the very early neurodevelopmental markers (pre- or perinatal origin) and the later markers (late neurodevelopmental) around the period of transition to illness. Based on our review of recent findings, we suggest that the onset of psychosis is a time of active brain changes, wherein, for a proportion of individuals, (i) an early (pre- and perinatal) neurodevelopmental lesion renders the brain vulnerable to anomalous late (particularly postpubertal) neurodevelopmental processes, as indicated by evidence for accelerated loss of gray matter and aberrant connectivity particularly in prefrontal regions; and (ii) these anomalous neurodevelopmental processes interact with other causative factors associated with the onset of psychosis (e.g., substance use, stress, and dysregulation of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis function), which together have neuroprogressive sequelae involving medial temporal and orbital prefrontal regions, as suggested by imaging studies around transition to active illness. However, the pathological processes underlying such progressive changes during "late neurodevelopment" remain unclear but may reflect anomalies of synaptic plasticity, abnormal brain maturation, the adverse effects of stress, or other environmental factors. In this context, the features of schizophrenia, including the neuropsychological deficits and behavioral manifestations, can be understood as direct effects of these multiple pathological processes at various neurodevelopmental stages, including genetic and nongenetic etiological factors.
-------------------------------------

10007665_234 - 0.907236405885 - science
[hydrothermal, formation, study, 6sus, synchrotron, tobermorite, hydrate, 5sus, xonotlite, calcium]

Hydrothermal formation of the calcium silicate hydrates, tobermorite (Ca 5Si 6O 16(OH) 2 ?? 4H 2O) and xonotlite (Ca 6Si 6O 17(OH) 2): An in situ synchrotron study
cited By (since 1996) 63
-------------------------------------

10004280_234 - 0.871715473921 - science
[neutrino, mass, mechanism, radiative]

Minimal Radiative Neutrino Mass Mechanism for Inverse Seesaw Models
We study a minimal one-loop radiative mechanism for generating small Majorana neutrino masses in inverse seesaw extensions of the Standard Model with two singlet fermions per family. The new feature of this radiative mechanism is that the one-loop induced left-handed neutrino mass matrix is directly proportional to the Majorana mass matrix of the right-handed neutrinos. This is a very economical scenario without necessitating the existence of non-standard scalar or gauge fields.
-------------------------------------

10009587_234 - 0.732366229304 - science
[acetaldehyde, xylitol, candida, production, ethanol]

Xylitol inhibits carcinogenic acetaldehyde production by Candida species.
Acetaldehyde is a highly toxic and mutagenic product of alcohol fermentation and metabolism which has been classified as a Class I carcinogen for humans by the International Agency for Research on Cancer of the World Health Organisation (WHO). Many Candida species representing oral microbiota have been shown to be capable of marked acetaldehyde production. The aim of our study was to examine the effects of various sugar alcohols and sugars on microbial acetaldehyde production. The study hypothesis was that xylitol could reduce the amount of acetaldehyde produced by Candida. Laboratory and clinical isolates of seven Candida species were selected for the study. The isolates were incubated in 12 mM ethanol and 110 mM glucose, fructose or xylitol at 37°C for 30 min and the formed acetaldehyde was measured by gas chromatography. Xylitol significantly (p < 0.0001) reduced the amount of acetaldehyde produced from ethanol by 84%. In the absence of xylitol, the mean acetaldehyde production in ethanol incubation was 220.5 μM and in ethanol-xylitol incubation 32.8 μM. This was found to be mediated by inhibition of the alcohol dehydrogenase enzyme activity. Coincubation with glucose reduced the amount of produced acetaldehyde by 23% and coincubation with fructose by 29%. At concentrations that are representative of those found in the oral cavity during the intake of proprietary xylitol products, xylitol was found to reduce the production of carcinogenic acetaldehyde from ethanol by Candida below the mutagenic level of 40-100 μM.
-------------------------------------

10003472_234 - 0.915448007477 - science
[astrocyte, neuron, astrocytic, excitability]

The astrocyte excitability brief: From receptors to gliotransmission.
Astrocytes do not merely serve as the supporting cast and scenery against which starring roles would be played by neurons. Rather, these glial cells are intimately involved in many of the brain's functions by responding to neuronal activity and modulating it. Such interplay between two principle neural cells, neurons and astrocytes, is evidenced in bi-directional glutamatergic astrocyte-neuron signaling. A key feature in this signaling pathway is astrocytic excitability based on variations of cytosolic Ca(2+). It enables astrocytes, through the activation of their glutamatergic receptors, to respond to the same signal used by nearby neurons in synaptic transmission. Furthermore, increases in cytosolic Ca(2+) in astrocytes can subsequently lead to Ca(2+)-dependent exocytotic secretion of gliotransmitter glutamate that in turn can signal to adjacent neurons. Astrocytic secretory machinery includes an assortment of exocytotic proteins which governs a merger of secretory vesicles to the plasma membrane. A cumulative knowledge on astrocytic excitability will aid better understanding of operating procedures in the brain in health and disease.
-------------------------------------

10018327_234 - 0.874846148381 - science
[cell, pylori, tumour, tumour-infiltrating, response, gastric, lymphoma]

Helicobacter pylori-specific tumour-infiltrating T cells provide contact dependent help for the growth of malignant B cells in low-grade gastric lymphoma of mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue.
Previous studies have shown that tumour cells from low-grade B-cell gastric lymphomas of mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT) type proliferate in vitro in response to heat-killed whole cell preparations of Helicobacter pylori, but only in the presence of tumour-infiltrating T cells. This response is strain-specific in that the tumours studied responded optimally to different strains of H. pylori. It was unclear from these studies, however, whether the ability to recognize the specific stimulating strains of H. pylori was a property of the tumour cells or the tumour-infiltrating T cells. This study shows that whereas the tumour cells do not respond to H. pylori, both freshly isolated tumour-infiltrating T cells and a T cell line derived from these cells proliferate in response to stimulating strains of H. pylori. T cells from the spleen of one of the patients do not share this property. These results suggest that B-cell proliferation in cases of low-grade gastric lymphoma of MALT type in vitro in response to H. pylori is due to recognition of H. pylori by tumour-infiltrating T cells, which in turn provide help for tumour cell proliferation. The observations provide an explanation for properties of gastric MALT-type lymphoma, such as regression following eradication of H. pylori and the tendency of the tumour to remain localized to the primary site.
-------------------------------------

10003278_234 - 0.716749646504 - science
[kd, assay, keloid]

Long-term organ culture of keloid disease tissue.
Keloid disease (KD) is a common fibroproliferative disorder of unknown aetiopathogenesis, with highly unsatisfactory treatment. Therefore, it is crucial to have a robust and clinically relevant model for studying KD pathobiology as well as preclinical testing of potential KD therapeutics. However, the unique occurrence of KD in human skin and the corresponding lack of animal models pose a major challenge in KD research. Therefore, we developed a simplified assay for the serum-free, long-term organ culture of KD tissue that facilitates quantitative analyses of major KD read-out parameters. Four millimetre KD punches embedded in a collagen matrix and organ-cultured at the epidermis air-liquid interphase (ALI) in supplemented William's E medium showed optimal tissue, cell and RNA preservation for up to 6 weeks (as measured by H & E and Pyronin Y histochemistry as well as by MTT assay, lactate dehydrogenase release and quantitative Ki67/TUNEL immunohistomorphometry). The keloid phenotype persisted well during this period, as shown by collagen-I and -III synthesis (Herovici's histochemistry staining and ELISA), and analysis of the expression of significant KD markers (CD3, CD20, CD31, CD34, CD56, tryptase, Langerin, vimentin, neutrophil elastase, CTGF and Collagen). To functionally evaluate whether this assay can test the response to candidate therapeutics, dexamethasone, a glucocorticosteroid often used in KD therapy, was administered. Indeed, dexamethasone significantly reduced the keloid volume and cellularity plus induced epidermal shrinkage. Therefore, this novel assay provides a quantitative, clinically relevant model system for studying KD pathobiology and response to treatment.
-------------------------------------

10008845_234 - 0.841373939502 - science
[tissue, enzyme, amine, lox, activity, oxidase]

Cross-linking of structural proteins in ageing skin: an in situ assay for the detection of amine oxidase activity.
With increasing age, dynamic tissues such as lungs, blood vessels and skin lose their ability to both deform and recoil, culminating in tissue stiffening. This loss of tissue elasticity, which profoundly impacts tissue function and thus morbidity, may be due not only to changes in the relative abundance of key extracellular matrix proteins within tissues but also to their accumulation of post-translational modifications. Whilst to date attention has focussed primarily on the age-related non-enzymatic formation of advanced glycation end products, the accumulation of pathological enzyme-mediated cross-links may also lead to age-related tissue stiffening. The lysyl oxidase (LOX) family of enzymes are constitutively expressed in adult tissues and are known to drive the catalysis of cross-links in both fibrillar collagens and elastin. Although immunochemical approaches are commonly used to localise the inactive pro-enzyme of LOX, and biochemical methods are employed to quantify activity in homogenised tissue, they do not allow for the in situ localisation of the enzyme. Thus, we have developed a novel assay to both detect and localise LOX enzyme activity in situ. LOX family members are amine oxidases and this assay uses the principle that an amine substrate in the presence of this class of enzyme will be oxidised to an aldehyde and hydrogen peroxide (H(2)O(2)). In turn, H(2)O(2), when combined with luminol and horseradish peroxidase, will produce a light-emitting reaction that can be detected by film autoradiography. The development of a technique to localise specific amine oxidase activity in tissue sections may provide crucial additional information on the exact role played by this class of enzymes in mediating age-related tissue stiffening.
-------------------------------------

10007278_234 - 0.883183134079 - science
[apoptosis, mouse, skin, role]

Role of Fas/Fas ligand-mediated apoptosis in murine contact hypersensitivity.
Apoptosis plays an important role in immune responses, but little is known about its involvement in contact hypersensitivity (CH). In this study, we have investigated the role of Fas/Fas ligand (FasL)-mediated apoptosis in the pathogenesis of CH. Mice were sensitized by one topical application of 100 microl of 3% oxazolone to shaved skin of the abdomen. Six days later, CH was provoked by challenging both sides of sensitized mouse right ear with 15 microl of 1% oxazolone. Using a DNA ladder assay, we found that apoptosis was induced in the skin of oxazolone-sensitized mice 24-96 h after allergen challenge. Annexin V-fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC)-propidium iodide (PI) apoptosis flow cytometric assay showed that early apoptotic CD4(+) T cells (annexin V-FITC(+)PI(-)), but not late apoptotic CD4(+) T cells (annexin V-FITC(+)PI(+)), increased in the inflamed skin of mice with CH. Moreover, the expressions of mRNAs for T helper (Th2) cytokine (interleukin (IL)-4), Th1 cytokine (interferon (IFN)-gamma) and proapoptotic molecules (Bax, Fas, FasL and IL-1beta-converting enzyme (ICE)/caspase-1) were significantly elevated in the oxazolone-sensitized mouse skin 6-72 h after allergen challenge. Dramatic increase in IL-10 mRNA was only observed in the sensitized mouse skin 6 and 12 h after allergen challenge. Furthermore, CH was significantly inhibited with decreased apoptosis and early apoptotic CD4(+) T cells in inflamed skin in Fas mutant lpr/lpr mice compared to wild-type mice, whereas there were no significant differences in IL-4, IFN-gamma, IL-10, Bax and ICE mRNAs in the inflamed skin of CH between lpr/lpr and wild-type mice. Our results thus suggest that Fas/FasL pathway partially contributes to apoptosis in murine CH and that Fas/FasL-mediated apoptosis plays a partial role in the development of CH. The contribution of Fas/FasL-mediated apoptosis to CH appears independent of Th1 and Th2 cytokines.
-------------------------------------

10007521_234 - 0.759605361387 - science
[serum, assay, use, clinical, variation, plasma]

Optimisation of circulating biomarkers of cell death for routine clinical use.
BACKGROUND: M30 and M65 enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays detect circulating cytokeratin 18 fragments released during caspase-dependent or total cell death, respectively, and have potential as biomarkers in epithelial cancers. While these assays have been validated, their robustness for routine clinical use is unknown. PATIENTS AND METHODS: M30 and M65 were measured in matched serum and plasma samples from 31 lung cancer patients and 18 controls. RESULTS: Time allowable between sample acquisition and processing is critical for assays in clinical use. A 4-h delay in processing at room temperature increased M30 (P < 0.0001), an effect minimised by incubation on ice. M30 and M65 in serum were resistant to processing variations including delays. Serum and plasma measurements correlated well although M30 but not M65 was lower in serum (P < 0.0005). Less variation between duplicate assays was observed in serum. Prolonged storage (-80 degrees C) led to increased M30 (12%, 6 months; 34%, 1 year). Sample dilution in the supplied assay diluent proved non-linear, whereas dilution in donor serum or porcine plasma restored linearity up to a ratio of 1 : 6. CONCLUSION: We present recommendations that improve the reliability of these assays for clinical use and recommend serum as the preferred matrix with data more resistant to variations in collection.
-------------------------------------

10011175_234 - 0.830690288681 - science
[coating, field, elastic, layer, parameter, acoustic, effect, quasi-resonance]

Quasi-resonances in sound-insulating coatings
This paper is concerned with the radiation of sound waves from a submerged cylindrical body which is coated by an imperfect elastic layer; that is, the coating only covers part of the cylinder. The focus of the study is to quantify the effect of the gap in the elastic layer on the radiated acoustic power. A finite element method is employed to determine the acoustic pressure field in the fluid and the displacement field in the coupled layer. This reveals that the effect of a modest sized gap in the coating does not markedly alter the radiated field except at distinct frequencies, at which values the coating exhibits strong fluid-coupled oscillations. We develop a simple analytical model to explain the resonance phenomenon and show that quasi-resonances arise when the wavelength of the deformation pattern 'matches' the azimuthal length of the surface of the coating. This resonant behaviour is conveniently captured by a single parameter Q, which is the ratio of the typical inertial fluid pressure induced by the wall oscillation to the stiffness of the elastic coating. For each choice of material parameters, there is shown to be an infinite set of values of Q corresponding to distinct quasi-resonance mode numbers. The effects on the radiated field due to variations in various physical parameters, such as acoustic wavenumber and elastic layer inertia, are also discussed. (C) 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
-------------------------------------

10009153_234 - 0.746343182651 - science
[chain, glycolipid, structure, lamellar, material, assembly, dodecyl, dynamics, headgroup, molecular]

Molecular dynamics study of anhydrous lamellar structures of synthetic glycolipids: effects of chain branching and disaccharide headgroup.
Glycolipids form materials of considerable potential for a wide range of surfactant and thin film applications. Understanding the effect of glycolipid covalent structure on the properties of their thermotropic and lyotropic assemblies is a key step toward rational design of new glycolipid-based materials. Here, we perform molecular dynamics simulations of anhydrous bilayers of dodecyl β-maltoside, dodecyl β-cellobioside, dodecyl β-isomaltoside, and a C(12)C(10) branched β-maltoside. Specifically, we examine the consequences of chain branching and headgroup identity on the structure and dynamics of the lamellar assemblies. Chain branching of the glycolipid leads to measurable differences in the dimensions and interactions of the lamellar assembly, as well as a more fluid-like hydrophobic chain region. Substitution of the maltosyl headgroup of βMal-C(12) by an isomaltosyl moiety leads to a significant decrease in bilayer spacing as well as a markedly altered pattern of inter-headgroup hydrogen bonding. The distinctive simulated structures of the two regioisomers provide insight into the difference of ∼90 °C in their observed clearing temperatures. For all four simulated glycolipid systems, with the exception of the sn-2 chain of the branched maltoside, the alkyl chains are ordered and exhibit a distinct tilt, consistent with recent crystallographic analysis of a branched chain Guerbet glycoside. These insights into structure-property relationships from simulation provide an important molecular basis for future design of synthetic glycolipid materials.
-------------------------------------

10008047_234 - 0.746860136329 - science
[variant, locus, gene, trait, human, variation, genetic, study, polygenic]

Hundreds of variants clustered in genomic loci and biological pathways affect human height.
Most common human traits and diseases have a polygenic pattern of inheritance: DNA sequence variants at many genetic loci influence the phenotype. Genome-wide association (GWA) studies have identified more than 600 variants associated with human traits, but these typically explain small fractions of phenotypic variation, raising questions about the use of further studies. Here, using 183,727 individuals, we show that hundreds of genetic variants, in at least 180 loci, influence adult height, a highly heritable and classic polygenic trait. The large number of loci reveals patterns with important implications for genetic studies of common human diseases and traits. First, the 180 loci are not random, but instead are enriched for genes that are connected in biological pathways (P = 0.016) and that underlie skeletal growth defects (P < 0.001). Second, the likely causal gene is often located near the most strongly associated variant: in 13 of 21 loci containing a known skeletal growth gene, that gene was closest to the associated variant. Third, at least 19 loci have multiple independently associated variants, suggesting that allelic heterogeneity is a frequent feature of polygenic traits, that comprehensive explorations of already-discovered loci should discover additional variants and that an appreciable fraction of associated loci may have been identified. Fourth, associated variants are enriched for likely functional effects on genes, being over-represented among variants that alter amino-acid structure of proteins and expression levels of nearby genes. Our data explain approximately 10% of the phenotypic variation in height, and we estimate that unidentified common variants of similar effect sizes would increase this figure to approximately 16% of phenotypic variation (approximately 20% of heritable variation). Although additional approaches are needed to dissect the genetic architecture of polygenic human traits fully, our findings indicate that GWA studies can identify large numbers of loci that implicate biologically relevant genes and pathways.
-------------------------------------

10011094_234 - 0.830690288681 - science
[coating, field, elastic, layer, parameter, acoustic, effect, quasi-resonance]

Quasi-resonances in sound-insulating coatings
This paper is concerned with the radiation of sound waves from a submerged cylindrical body which is coated by an imperfect elastic layer; that is, the coating only covers part of the cylinder. The focus of the study is to quantify the effect of the gap in the elastic layer on the radiated acoustic power. A finite element method is employed to determine the acoustic pressure field in the fluid and the displacement field in the coupled layer. This reveals that the effect of a modest sized gap in the coating does not markedly alter the radiated field except at distinct frequencies, at which values the coating exhibits strong fluid-coupled oscillations. We develop a simple analytical model to explain the resonance phenomenon and show that quasi-resonances arise when the wavelength of the deformation pattern 'matches' the azimuthal length of the surface of the coating. This resonant behaviour is conveniently captured by a single parameter Q, which is the ratio of the typical inertial fluid pressure induced by the wall oscillation to the stiffness of the elastic coating. For each choice of material parameters, there is shown to be an infinite set of values of Q corresponding to distinct quasi-resonance mode numbers. The effects on the radiated field due to variations in various physical parameters, such as acoustic wavenumber and elastic layer inertia, are also discussed. (C) 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
-------------------------------------

10018111_234 - 0.789980949616 - science
[atrial, mutation, s140g, model, excitation, kcnq1, wave, tissue, fibrillation, vulnerability]

Pro-arrhythmogenic Effects of the S140G KCNQ1 Mutation in Human Atrial Fibrillation - Insights from Modelling.
Functional analysis has shown that the missense gain-in-function KCNQ1 S140G mutation associated with familial atrial fibrillation produces an increase of the slow delayed rectifier potassium current (IKs). Through computer modelling, this study investigated mechanisms by which the KCNQ1 S140G mutation promotes and perpetuates atrial fibrillation. In simulations, the Courtemanche et al. model of human atrial cell action potentials (APs) was modified to incorporate experimental data on changes of IKs induced by the KCNQ1 S140G mutation. The cell models for wild type (WT) and mutant type (MT) IKs were incorporated into homogeneous multicellular 2D and 3D tissue models. Effects of the mutation were quantified on: AP profile; AP duration (APD) restitution; effective refractory period (ERP) restitution and conduction velocity (CV) restitution. Temporal and spatial vulnerabilities of atrial tissue to genesis of re-entry were computed. Dynamic behaviours of re-entrant excitation waves (lifespan (LS), tip meandering patterns and dominant frequency) in 2D and 3D models were characterised. It was shown that the KCNQ1 S140G mutation abbreviated atrial APD and ERP and flattened APD and ERP restitution curves. It reduced atrial CV at low excitation rates, but increased it at high excitation rates that facilitated the conduction of high rate atrial excitation waves. Although it increased slightly tissue temporal vulnerability for initiating re-entry, it reduced markedly the minimal substrate size necessary for sustaining re-entry (increasing the tissue spatial vulnerability). In the 2D and 3D models, the mutation also stabilized and accelerated re-entrant excitation waves, leading to rapid and sustained re-entry. In the 3D model, scroll waves under the mutation condition MT conditions also degenerated into persistent and erratic wavelets, leading to fibrillation. In conclusion, increased IKs due to the KCNQ1 S140G mutation increases atrial susceptibility to arrhythmia due to increased tissue vulnerability, shortened ERP and altered atrial conduction velocity, which, in combination, facilitate initiation and maintenance of re-entrant excitation waves.
-------------------------------------

10009840_234 - 0.908009679196 - science
[neutrophil, albican, phagocytosis]

Interaction of Candida krusei with human neutrophils in vitro.
In human neutrophil monolayer assays the percentage phagocytosis of Candida krusei by neutrophils was found to be significantly lower (9%) than that for C. albicans (37%). Both organisms required opsonisation with complement products for ingestion. The number of competent neutrophils phagocytosing C. krusei was increased with: antisera specific to C. albicans (49%); the neutrophil chemo-attractant formyl-methionyl-leucyl-phenylalanine (fmlp) (49%); mannan extracted from the cell wall of C. albicans (72%); and a crude cell extract from C. krusei (61%). In the case of C. albicans all but one of these methods increased the proportion of phagocytosing neutrophils per slide. The data provide evidence for differences in quantitative phagocytosis of C. krusei and C. albicans and suggest that C. krusei is resistant to phagocytosis in vitro.
-------------------------------------

10010342_234 - 0.854437992433 - science
[metabolic, datum, modeling, time, gene, switch, flux, antibiotic]

Metabolic modeling and analysis of the metabolic switch in Streptomyces coelicolor
Background: The transition from exponential to stationary phase in Streptomyces coelicolor is accompanied by a major metabolic switch and results in a strong activation of secondary metabolism. Here we have explored the underlying reorganization of the metabolome by combining computational predictions based on constraint-based modeling and detailed transcriptomics time course observations.Results: We reconstructed the stoichiometric matrix of S. coelicolor, including the major antibiotic biosynthesis pathways, and performed flux balance analysis to predict flux changes that occur when the cell switches from biomass to antibiotic production. We defined the model input based on observed fermenter culture data and used a dynamically varying objective function to represent the metabolic switch. The predicted fluxes of many genes show highly significant correlation to the time series of the corresponding gene expression data. Individual mispredictions identify novel links between antibiotic production and primary metabolism.Conclusion: Our results show the usefulness of constraint-based modeling for providing a detailed interpretation of time course gene expression data. ?? 2010 Alam et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd.
-------------------------------------

10017774_234 - 0.950563176007 - science
[lipid, transformation, substrate, glycolipid]

Accelerated Enzymatic Galactosylation of N-Acetylglucosaminolipids in Lipid Microdomains
A fluoro-tagged N-acetylglucosamine-capped glycolipid that can form lipid microdomains in fluid phospholipid bilayers has been shown to be enzymatically galactosylated by bovine β(1,4)-galactosyltransferase. MALDI MS, HPLC, and LC–MS revealed that the rate of enzymatic transformation was significantly enhanced by lipid clustering; at a 1% mol/mol loading, clustered glycolipids were galactosylated 9-fold faster than glycolipids dispersed across the bilayer surface. The transformation of the GlcNAc “glycocalyx” into a Gal(β1–4)GlcNAc “glycocalyx” relabeled these vesicles, making them susceptible to agglutination by Erythrina cristagalli lectin (ECL). The kinetic parameters for this transformation revealed a lower apparent Km when the substrate lipids were clustered, which is attributed to multivalent binding to an extended substrate cleft around the active site. These observations may have important implications where soluble enzymes act on substrates embedded within cellular lipid rafts.
-------------------------------------

10008707_234 - 0.769689545111 - science
[cell, ctm, cancer, tumor, ctc, emt, patient, lung]

Circulating tumor cells as a window on metastasis biology in lung cancer.
Circulating tumor cell (CTC) number in metastatic cancer patients yields prognostic information consistent with enhanced cell migration and invasion via loss of adhesion, a feature of epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT). Tumor cells also invade via collective migration with maintained cell-cell contacts and consistent with this is the circulating tumor microemboli (CTM; contiguous groups of tumor cells) that are observed in metastatic cancer patients. Using a blood filtration approach, we examined markers of EMT (cytokeratins, E-cadherin, vimentin, neural cadherin) and prevalence of apoptosis in CTCs and CTM to explore likely mechanism(s) of invasion in lung cancer patients and address the hypothesis that cells within CTM have a survival advantage. Intra-patient and inter-patient heterogeneity was observed for EMT markers in CTCs and CTM. Vimentin was only expressed in some CTCs, but in the majority of cells within CTM; E-cadherin expression was lost, cytoplasmic or nuclear, and rarely expressed at the surface of the cells within CTM. A subpopulation of CTCs was apoptotic, but apoptosis was absent within CTM. This pilot study suggests that EMT is not prosecuted homogeneously in tumor cells within the circulation of lung cancer patients and that collective migration and enhanced survival of cells within CTM might contribute to lung cancer metastasis. Multiplex analysis and further detailed exploration of metastatic potential and EMT in CTCs/CTM is now warranted in a larger patient cohort.
-------------------------------------

10012733_234 - 0.910004358569 - science
[sulfate, dioxide, sulfur, emission, wet, non-linearity, oxidn, cloudy, deposition]

The role of cloud processing in the relationship between wet deposited sulphur and sulphur dioxide emissions.
It is well established that wet deposition of sulfate in the UK has fallen by a much smaller fraction than have emissions of sulfur dioxide. Dry deposition of sulfur has decreased in proportion to the decline in emissions. A no. of suggestions have been made which offer possible explanations for this non-linearity between emissions and wet deposition. In this paper a model of the processing of sulfur dioxide by aq. phase cloud chem. in a cloudy boundary layer is presented. This work does not simulate all the details of the mechanisms by which sulfate is incorporated into pptn. It does, however, explore the non-linearity of this oxidn. process. It is shown that the oxidn. of sulfur dioxide, in these conditions, over the UK is dominated by oxidn. by ozone. The rate of sulfate prodn. is then controlled by the availability of the one basic trace gas in the atm., ammonia. Using realistic concns. of the reacting species this is found to simulate well the obsd. non-linearity. The model predicts that sulfate and sulfur dioxide concns. will be uncorrelated in the cloudy boundary layer but that ammonium and sulfate will be well correlated. Field observations at a cloudy site in Northern England are consistent with these predictions. on SciFinder (R)
-------------------------------------

10003463_234 - 0.88289075863 - science
[il-1, resolution, inflammation, inflammasome]

A Genetically Encoded IL-1β Bioluminescence Resonance Energy Transfer Sensor To Monitor Inflammasome Activity.
Inflammation is fundamental for protecting the organism against infection and injury. However, a failure to control immune response results in chronic inflammation and several associated disorders such as pain and loss of function. Initiation of inflammation is orchestrated by cytokines, among which IL-1β is particularly important. IL-1β is synthesized as an inactive protein that has to be processed by the inflammasome to generate the mature bioactive form. Conventional techniques cannot monitor IL-1β activation with high spatial and temporal resolution. In this study, we present a ratiometric biosensor that allows monitoring IL-1β processing in real time, with a temporal resolution of seconds and with a single-cell spatial resolution. Using this sensor, to our knowledge, we describe for the first time the kinetic of the inflammasome activity in living macrophages. With this new probe, we also demonstrated that the pro-IL-1β processing occurs all over the cytoplasm.
-------------------------------------

10005050_234 - 0.886405503408 - science
[hydrogen, simulation, mass, neutral, molecular]

Modelling neutral hydrogen in galaxies using cosmological hydrodynamical simulations
The characterization of the atomic and molecular hydrogen content ofhigh-redshift galaxies is a major observational challenge that will beaddressed over the coming years with a new generation of radiotelescopes. We investigate this important issue by considering thestates of hydrogen across a range of structures within high-resolutioncosmological hydrodynamical simulations. In addition, our simulationsallow us to investigate the sensitivity of our results to numericalresolution and to sub-grid baryonic physics (especially feedback fromsupernovae and active galactic nuclei). We find that the mostsignificant uncertainty in modelling the neutral hydrogen distributionarises from our need to model a self-shielding correction in moderatedensity regions. Future simulations incorporating radiative transferschemes will be vital to improve on our empirical self-shieldingthreshold. Irrespective of the exact nature of the threshold, we findthat while the atomic hydrogen mass function evolves only mildly fromredshift two to zero, the molecular hydrogen mass function increaseswith increasing redshift, especially at the high-mass end.Interestingly, the weak evolution of the neutral hydrogen mass functionis insensitive to the feedback scheme utilized, but the opposite is truefor the molecular gas, which is more closely associated with the starformation in the simulations.
-------------------------------------

10009855_234 - 0.796899944352 - science
[mid-level, convective, stratus, embedded, supercooled, observation, cell, acpd, multiplication, ice]

Observations of ice multiplication in a weakly convective cell embedded in supercooled mid-level stratus
ACPD
-------------------------------------

10017141_234 - 0.877713909363 - science
[tumour, cancer, oxygen, molecule, metabolism, low, systems, analysis, biology]

Systems Biology of HIF Metabolism in Cancer
Lay AbstractThe University of ManchesterFaculty of Engineering and Physical SciencesLay Abstract of thesis entitled ‘Systems Biology of HIF Metabolism in Cancer’Submitted by Emily Grace Armitage for the degree of Doctor of Philosophy, September 2012Cancer is one of the most devastating human diseases that cause a vast number of mortalities worldwide each year. Cancer research is one of the largest fields in the life sciences and despite many astounding breakthroughs and contributions over the past few decades, there is still a considerable amount to unveil on the function of cancer that would improve diagnostics, prognostics and therapy. Since cancer is known to involve a wide range of processes, applying methods to study it as a whole system could reveal new properties of cancer. Systems biology is becoming an increasingly popular tool in the life sciences. The approach has been applied to many biological and biomedical analyses drawing upon recent advancements in technology. When tumours grow, their oxygen supply becomes scarce and they need to employ mechanisms to overcome this for survival. In this thesis, tumour metabolism has been investigated with particular emphasis on how tumours respond to low oxygen. This has involved the analysis small molecules using state of the art techniques to determine which molecules are caused by and appear to promote survival in tumour cells in low oxygen. These molecules have also been imaged in cross sections of tumours to see where they occur and to hypothesise the function of these molecules based on their position with respect to oxygen availability. Using the data from each analysis it has been possible to link together knowledge about the molecules revealed to consider how tumours survive in low oxygen as a whole system.
-------------------------------------

10009686_234 - 0.729459163341 - science
[mkk4, kinase, gene, jnk, mouse, defect, mkk7, protein, brain]

Targeted deletion of the mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase 4 gene in the nervous system causes severe brain developmental defects and premature death.
The c-Jun NH2-terminal protein kinase (JNK) is a mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) involved in the regulation of various physiological processes. Its activity is increased upon phosphorylation by the MAPK kinases MKK4 and MKK7. The early embryonic death of mice lacking an mkk4 or mkk7 gene has provided genetic evidence that MKK4 and MKK7 have nonredundant functions in vivo. To elucidate the physiological role of MKK4, we generated a novel mouse model in which the mkk4 gene could be specifically deleted in the brain. At birth, the mutant mice were indistinguishable from their control littermates, but they stopped growing a few days later and died prematurely, displaying severe neurological defects. Decreased JNK activity in the absence of MKK4 correlated with impaired phosphorylation of a subset of physiologically relevant JNK substrates and with altered gene expression. These defects resulted in the misalignment of the Purkinje cells in the cerebellum and delayed radial migration in the cerebral cortex. Together, our data demonstrate for the first time that MKK4 is an essential activator of JNK required for the normal development of the brain.
-------------------------------------

10010326_234 - 0.916958158544 - science
[parasite, leishmania, drug-resistant, metabolomic, isolate, drug-sensitive, metabolic, drug, clinical, donovanus]

Metabolomics to unveil and understand phenotypic diversity between pathogen populations
Leishmaniasis is a debilitating disease caused by the parasite Leishmania. There is extensive clinical polymorphism, including variable responsiveness to treatment. We study Leishmania donovani parasites isolated from visceral leishmaniasis patients in Nepal that responded differently to antimonial treatment due to differing intrinsic drug sensitivity of the parasites. Here, we present a proof-of-principle study in which we applied a metabolomics pipeline specifically developed for L. donovani to characterize the global metabolic differences between antimonial-sensitive and antimonial-resistant L. donovani isolates. Clones of drug-sensitive and drug-resistant parasite isolates from clinical samples were cultured in vitro and harvested for metabolomics analysis. The relative abundance of 340 metabolites was determined by {ZIC-HILIC} chromatography coupled to {LTQ-Orbitrap} mass spectrometry. Our measurements cover approximately 20\% of the predicted core metabolome of Leishmania and additionally detected a large number of lipids. Drug-sensitive and drug-resistant parasites showed distinct metabolic profiles, and unsupervised clustering and principal component analysis clearly distinguished the two phenotypes. For 100 metabolites, the detected intensity differed more than three-fold between the 2 phenotypes. Many of these were in specific areas of lipid metabolism, suggesting that the membrane composition of the drug-resistant parasites is extensively modified. Untargeted metabolomics has been applied on clinical Leishmania isolates to uncover major metabolic differences between drug-sensitive and drug-resistant isolates. The identified major differences provide novel insights into the mechanisms involved in resistance to antimonial drugs, and facilitate investigations using targeted approaches to unravel the key changes mediating drug resistance. ?? 2010 {t'Kindt} et al.
-------------------------------------

10009581_234 - 0.720207888632 - science
[osteoarthritis, study, chromosome, genome-wide, association, locus, close, patient, arcogen, control]

Identification of new susceptibility loci for osteoarthritis (arcOGEN): a genome-wide association study.
BACKGROUND: Osteoarthritis is the most common form of arthritis worldwide and is a major cause of pain and disability in elderly people. The health economic burden of osteoarthritis is increasing commensurate with obesity prevalence and longevity. Osteoarthritis has a strong genetic component but the success of previous genetic studies has been restricted due to insufficient sample sizes and phenotype heterogeneity. METHODS: We undertook a large genome-wide association study (GWAS) in 7410 unrelated and retrospectively and prospectively selected patients with severe osteoarthritis in the arcOGEN study, 80% of whom had undergone total joint replacement, and 11,009 unrelated controls from the UK. We replicated the most promising signals in an independent set of up to 7473 cases and 42,938 controls, from studies in Iceland, Estonia, the Netherlands, and the UK. All patients and controls were of European descent. FINDINGS: We identified five genome-wide significant loci (binomial test p≤5·0×10(-8)) for association with osteoarthritis and three loci just below this threshold. The strongest association was on chromosome 3 with rs6976 (odds ratio 1·12 95% CI 1·08-1·16; p=7·24×10(-11)), which is in perfect linkage disequilibrium with rs11177. This SNP encodes a missense polymorphism within the nucleostemin-encoding gene GNL3. Levels of nucleostemin were raised in chondrocytes from patients with osteoarthritis in functional studies. Other significant loci were on chromosome 9 close to ASTN2, chromosome 6 between FILIP1 and SENP6, chromosome 12 close to KLHDC5 and PTHLH, and in another region of chromosome 12 close to CHST11. One of the signals close to genome-wide significance was within the FTO gene, which is involved in regulation of bodyweight-a strong risk factor for osteoarthritis. All risk variants were common in frequency and exerted small effects. INTERPRETATION: Our findings provide insight into the genetics of arthritis and identify new pathways that might be amenable to future therapeutic intervention. FUNDING: arcOGEN was funded by a special purpose grant from Arthritis Research UK.
-------------------------------------

10003574_234 - 0.779729237964 - science
[gene, cluster, bialapho, alanylation, step, biosynthetic, productivity]

The bialaphos biosynthetic genes of Streptomyces hygroscopicus: Cloning and analysis of the genes involved in the alanylation step
We have isolated and studied the genes involved in the alanylation step in the biosynthesis of a herbicide, bialaphos which is produced by Streptomyces hygroscopicus. Three bialaphos-nonproducing mutants, NP60, NP61 and NP62, isolated from S. hygroscopicus by treatment with N-methyl-N'-nitro-N-nitrosoguanidine were defective for the alanylation step and were not restored to productivity by any locus of the gene cluster previously cloned. Three plasmids were isolated using NP60, NP61 and NP62 as recipients. The genes which restored productivity to NP61 and NP62 hybridized to the contiguous region of the bialaphos biosynthetic gene cluster. The gene cluster involved in the bialaphos production was about 35 kb long. The gene which restored productivity to NP60 did not hybridize to the bialaphos biosynthetic gene cluster. VM3 and VM4, putative alanylation blocked mutants, were derived from a bialaphos producer by gene replacement of an unidentified region of the biosynthetic gene cluster with an in vitro altered DNA sequence. The genes which restored productivity to VM3 and VM4 were located between the genes which code for phosphinomethylmalic acid synthetase and demethylphosphinothricin acetyltransferase in the cluster. These results suggest that multiple genes are involved in the alanylation step.
-------------------------------------

10006959_234 - 0.771393804452 - science
[node, sinus, human, pacemaker, distribution, heart, right, area, anatomical, atrium]

Computer three-dimensional anatomical reconstruction of the human sinus node and a novel paranodal area.
We have previously shown in rabbit that the pacemaker of the heart (the sinus node) is widespread and matches the wide distribution of the leading pacemaker site within the right atrium. There is, however, uncertainty about the precise location of the pacemaker in human heart, and its spatial relationships with the surrounding right atrial muscle. Therefore, the aim of the current study was to investigate the distribution of the sinus node tissue in a series of healthy human hearts and, for one of the hearts to construct a computer three-dimensional anatomical model of the sinus node, including the likely orientation of myocytes. A combination of experimental techniques--diffusion tensor magnetic resonance imaging (DT-MRI), histology, immunohistochemistry, image processing and computer modelling--was used. Our data show that the sinus node was larger than in previous studies and, most importantly, we identified a previously unknown area running alongside the sinus node (the "paranodal area"), which is even more extensive than the sinus node. This area possesses properties of both nodal and atrial tissues and may have a role in pacemaking. For example, it could explain the wide spread distribution of the leading pacemaker site in human right atrium, a phenomenon known as the wandering pacemaker observed in clinics. In summary, a novel 3D anatomical reconstruction presents a new picture of the distribution of nodal cells within the human right atrium.
-------------------------------------

10006975_234 - 0.819025863396 - science
[receptor, cholesterol, plasma, ligand, g-protein-coupled, nuclear, acid, eadsa, oxysterol]

Analytical strategies for characterization of oxysterol lipidomes: Liver X receptor ligands in plasma.
Bile acids, bile alcohols, and hormonal steroids represent the ultimate biologically active products of cholesterol metabolism in vertebrates. However, intermediates in their formation, including oxysterols and cholestenoic acids, also possess known, e.g., as ligands to nuclear and G-protein-coupled receptors, and unknown regulatory activities. The potential diversity of molecules originating from the cholesterol structure is very broad and their abundance in biological materials ranges over several orders of magnitude. Here we describe the application of enzyme-assisted derivatization for sterol analysis (EADSA) in combination with liquid chromatography-electrospray ionization-mass spectrometry to define the oxysterol and cholestenoic acid metabolomes of human plasma. Quantitative profiling of adult plasma using EADSA leads to the detection of over 30 metabolites derived from cholesterol, some of which are ligands to the nuclear receptors LXR, FXR, and pregnane X receptor or the G-protein-coupled receptor Epstein-Barr virus-induced gene 2. The potential of the EADSA technique in screening for inborn errors of cholesterol metabolism and biosynthesis is demonstrated by the unique plasma profile of patients suffering from cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis. The analytical methods described are easily adapted to the analysis of other biological fluids, including cerebrospinal fluid, and also tissues, e.g., brain, in which nuclear and G-protein-coupled receptors may have important regulatory roles.
-------------------------------------

10015084_234 - 0.790259198028 - science
[gene, rp, experiment, microarray, analysis, technique, datum]

Rank products: A simple, yet powerful, new method to detect differentially regulated genes in replicated microarray experiments
One of the main objectives in the analysis of microarray experiments is the identification of genes that are differentially expressed under two experimental conditions. This task is complicated by the noisiness of the data and the large number of genes that are examined simultaneously. Here, we present a novel technique for identifying differentially expressed genes that does not originate from a sophisticated statistical model but rather from an analysis of biological reasoning. The new technique, which is based on calculating rank products (RP) from replicate experiments, is fast and simple. At the same time, it provides a straightforward and statistically stringent way to determine the significance level for each gene and allows for the flexible control of the false-detection rate and familywise error rate in the multiple testing situation of a microarray experiment. We use the RP technique on three biological data sets and show that in each case it performs more reliably and consistently than the non-parametric t-test variant implemented in Tusher et al.'s significance analysis of microarrays (SAM). We also show that the RP results are reliable in highly noisy data. An analysis of the physiological function of the identified genes indicates that the RP approach is powerful for identifying biologically relevant expression changes. In addition, using RP can lead to a sharp reduction in the number of replicate experiments needed to obtain reproducible results. ?? 2004 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
-------------------------------------

10007825_234 - 0.742819527984 - science
[dioxide, carbon, gully, blanket, concentration, times, doc, flux, peat]

Carbon dioxide fluxes and DOC concentrations of eroding blanket peat gullies
Times Cited: 0
-------------------------------------

10018310_234 - 0.852038892096 - science
[inflammation, effector, site, inflammatory, cell]

The therapeutic potential of positive and negative immune cell co-stimulation during inflammation.
Inflammatory cascades are initiated in response to alarm signals that may result from infection, malignant transformation or trauma. Immunity, however, must be controlled; otherwise damage may occur to otherwise healthy tissue within the same microenvironment. Similarly, peripheral tolerance mechanisms must ensure that autoreactive thymic or bone marrow emigrants do not respond upon encounter with the autoantigen. Organized lymphoid structures such as lymph nodes, spleen and Peyer's patches appear to regulate inflammation successfully, displaying controlled expansion and contraction. However, when immune cells flood into effector sites, the organization of T- and B-lymphocytes is lacking. What controls inflammatory cascades in lymph nodes but rarely in effector sites is not clear. We believe the difference lies in the Toll-like receptor ligand load, which is high in effector sites and drives uncontrolled inflammation. Similarly, we believe that initiation of autoimmune inflammation is initiated by the liberation of inflammatory signals due to infection or trauma. In this review, we highlight some of the molecules responsible for maintaining an activated T-cell phenotype, strategies to interrupt these therapeutically and the impact of ligating inhibitory receptors on antigen-presenting cells.
-------------------------------------

10003961_234 - 0.800521309605 - science
[polymer, behaviour, chain, study]

Controlled synthesis of radiolabelled amine methacrylate water-soluble polymers with end-groups of varying hydrophobicity and studies of adsorption behaviour
The effect of chain end chemistry on the behaviour of poly(2-(diethylamino)ethyl methacrylate) has been studied through the placement of various radioactive groups with increasing hydrophobicity at the chain end of the polymer. Controlled radical polymerisation with (14)C-labelled initiators was used to form polymers of very similar chain length including doubly-labelled, fluorescent-radio polymers. Monitoring and quantification of behaviour was conducted purely using radiotechniques, without the need for fluorescence measurement, showing a clear impact on solid surface adsorption across a range of surface types (filter paper, photographic paper and hair). The studies presented here have clear implications for the study of polymer behaviour through low level fluorescent modification of water-soluble polymers.
-------------------------------------

10009040_234 - 0.880546738396 - science
[protein, mitochondrial, form, ims]

Cytosolic thioredoxin system facilitates the import of mitochondrial small Tim proteins.
Thiol-disulphide redox regulation has a key role during the biogenesis of mitochondrial intermembrane space (IMS) proteins. Only the Cys-reduced form of precursor proteins can be imported into mitochondria, which is followed by disulphide bond formation in the mitochondrial IMS. In contrast to the wealth of knowledge on the oxidation process inside mitochondria, little is known about how precursors are maintained in an import-competent form in the cytosol. Here we provide the first evidence that the cytosolic thioredoxin system is required to maintain the IMS small Tim proteins in reduced forms and facilitate their mitochondrial import during respiratory growth.
-------------------------------------

10018380_234 - 0.804458311003 - science
[innate, cell, immune, immunity]

Structured regulation of inflammation during respiratory viral infection.
Innate immune cells including macrophages, dendritic cells, and granulocytes are resident within or patrol very different microenvironments in the host. Their activity or responsiveness to antigen is dictated by site-specific factors. Because of the constant exposure to environmental antigens and commensal microorganisms, mucosal immunity needs to be more constrained than peripheral counterparts to prevent unnecessary inflammation. The epithelial surfaces that dominate all mucosal tissues provide an ideal regulator since innate immune cells are often in intimate contact with, or lie immediately beneath, them and a breach in epithelial integrity would signal a damaging event and release innate immunity from their influence. We discuss the role of the respiratory epithelium in raising the threshold of innate immune cell activation at homoeostasis, how its absence triggers innate immunity, and how inflammatory resolution often produces an altered homoeostatic environment that can affect the next inflammatory event at this site.
-------------------------------------

10011636_234 - 0.797099006325 - science
[rna, dna, molecule]

Splint ligation of RNA with t4 DNA ligase.
Splint ligation of RNA, whereby specific RNA molecules are ligated together, can be carried out using T4 DNA ligase and a bridging DNA oligonucleotide complementary to the RNAs. This method takes advantage of the property of T4 DNA ligase to join RNA molecules when they are in an RNA:DNA hybrid. Splint ligation is a useful tool for the introduction of modified nucleotides into RNA molecules, insertion of a radiolabel into a specific position within an RNA and for the assembly of smaller synthetic RNAs into longer RNA molecules. Such modifications enable a wide range of experiments to be carried out with the modified RNA including structural studies, co-immunoprecipitations, and the ability to map sites of RNA:RNA and RNA:protein interactions.
-------------------------------------

10008606_234 - 0.852814574776 - science
[epidermal, cytokine, lc, role, cell, skin, contact, sensitization, chemical]

Epidermal cytokines in contact hypersensitivity: Immunological roles and practical applications.
Local trauma and topical exposure to sensitizing chemicals induces the production by epidermal cells of a variety of cytokines including interleukins 1 (alpha and beta), 6, 8 and 10 (IL-1alpha, IL-1beta, IL-6, IL-8 and IL-10), granulocyte/macrophage colony-stimulating factor and tumour necrosis factor alpha. There is mounting evidence that keratinocyte-derived cytokines play a role of some importance in cutaneous immune responses and the development of contact sensitization. The induction phase of contact sensitization is dependent upon the action of epidermal Langerhans cells (LC). Following epicutaneous exposure to skin sensitizing chemicals LC are induced to migrate via afferent lymphatics to the draining lymph nodes. During migration, or shortly following arrival in the nodes, LC acquire the characteristics of lymphoid dendritic cells. This functional maturation is accompanied by elevated expression of MHC class II (Ia) antigens and of intercellular adhesion molecule-1 (ICAM-1). Increased expression of ICAM-1 and Ia facilitates the interaction with, and stimulation of, T lymphocytes by dendritic cells. The role epidermal cytokines play in this process is described. Characterization of the role epidermal cytokines play in regulating LC function may allow not only clarification of the molecular events which initiate skin sensitization, but also provide opportunities to investigate in vitro the consequences of the interaction of chemical allergens with the skin.
-------------------------------------

10003675_234 - 0.8697045621 - science
[surface, line, gradient]

On Calculating surface Potential Gradient of Overhead Line Conductors
The surface potential gradient is a critical designparameter for planning overhead lines, as it determines the levelof corona loss (CL), radio interference (RI), and audible noise(AN). The majority of existing models for surface gradientcalculation are based on analytical methods which restrict theirapplication in simulating complex surface geometry. This articleproposes a novel method which utilizes both analytical andnumerical procedures to predict the surface gradient. One of UKNational Grid's transmission line configurations has beenselected as an example to compare the results for differentmethods. The different stranding shapes are a key variable indetermining dry surface fields.
-------------------------------------

10007325_234 - 0.795116257645 - science
[adiponectin, novel, level, risk, metabolic, locus, trait, t2d]

Novel loci for adiponectin levels and their influence on type 2 diabetes and metabolic traits: a multi-ethnic meta-analysis of 45,891 individuals.
Circulating levels of adiponectin, a hormone produced predominantly by adipocytes, are highly heritable and are inversely associated with type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2D) and other metabolic traits. We conducted a meta-analysis of genome-wide association studies in 39,883 individuals of European ancestry to identify genes associated with metabolic disease. We identified 8 novel loci associated with adiponectin levels and confirmed 2 previously reported loci (P = 4.5×10(-8)-1.2×10(-43)). Using a novel method to combine data across ethnicities (N = 4,232 African Americans, N = 1,776 Asians, and N = 29,347 Europeans), we identified two additional novel loci. Expression analyses of 436 human adipocyte samples revealed that mRNA levels of 18 genes at candidate regions were associated with adiponectin concentrations after accounting for multiple testing (p<3×10(-4)). We next developed a multi-SNP genotypic risk score to test the association of adiponectin decreasing risk alleles on metabolic traits and diseases using consortia-level meta-analytic data. This risk score was associated with increased risk of T2D (p = 4.3×10(-3), n = 22,044), increased triglycerides (p = 2.6×10(-14), n = 93,440), increased waist-to-hip ratio (p = 1.8×10(-5), n = 77,167), increased glucose two hours post oral glucose tolerance testing (p = 4.4×10(-3), n = 15,234), increased fasting insulin (p = 0.015, n = 48,238), but with lower in HDL-cholesterol concentrations (p = 4.5×10(-13), n = 96,748) and decreased BMI (p = 1.4×10(-4), n = 121,335). These findings identify novel genetic determinants of adiponectin levels, which, taken together, influence risk of T2D and markers of insulin resistance.
-------------------------------------

10011792_234 - 0.86844695559 - science
[dimensions, times, mandibular, variation, corpus, hominid, cited, reappraisal]

A REAPPRAISAL OF VARIATION IN HOMINID MANDIBULAR CORPUS DIMENSIONS
Times Cited: 31
-------------------------------------

10018368_234 - 0.822963432438 - science
[rsv, ctl, cd8, mucosal, peptide, viral, response, mouse, clearance, adjuvant]

Mucosal delivery of a respiratory syncytial virus CTL peptide with enterotoxin-based adjuvants elicits protective, immunopathogenic, and immunoregulatory antiviral CD8+ T cell responses.
In an effort to develop a safe and effective vaccine against respiratory syncytial virus (RSV), we used Escherichia coli heat-labile toxin (LT), and LTK63 (an LT mutant devoid of ADP-ribosyltransferase activity) to elicit murine CD8(+) CTL responses to an intranasally codelivered CTL peptide from the second matrix protein (M2) of RSV. M2(82-90)-specific CD8(+) T cells were detected by IFN-gamma enzyme-linked immunospot and (51)Cr release assay in local and systemic lymph nodes, and their induction was dependent on the use of a mucosal adjuvant. CTL elicited by peptide immunization afforded protection against RSV challenge, but also enhanced weight loss. CTL-mediated viral clearance was not dependent on IFN-gamma since depletion using specific mAb during RSV challenge did not affect cellular recruitment or viral clearance. Depletion of IFN-gamma did, however, reduce the concentration of TNF detected in lung homogenates of challenged mice and largely prevented the weight loss associated with CTL-mediated viral clearance. Mice primed with the attachment glycoprotein (G) develop lung eosinophilia after intranasal RSV challenge. Mucosal peptide vaccination reduced pulmonary eosinophilia in mice subsequently immunized with G and challenged with RSV. These studies emphasize that protective and immunoregulatory CD8(+) CTL responses can be mucosally elicited using enterotoxin-based mucosal adjuvants but that resistance against viral infection may be accompanied by enhanced disease.
-------------------------------------

10008948_234 - 0.733187596391 - science
[rod, cone, retinal, mouse, central, disease, human, mutation, degeneration, pattern]

RPGR-associated retinal degeneration in human X-linked RP and a murine model.
PURPOSE: We investigated the retinal disease due to mutations in the retinitispigmentosa GTPase regulator (RPGR) gene in human patients and in an Rpgrconditional knockout (cko) mouse model.METHODS: XLRP patients with RPGR-ORF15 mutations (n = 35, ages at first visit5-72 years) had clinical examinations, and rod and cone perimetry. Rpgr-cko mice,in which the proximal promoter and first exon were deleted ubiquitously, wereback-crossed onto a BALB/c background, and studied with optical coherencetomography and electroretinography (ERG). Retinal histopathology was performed on a subset.RESULTS: Different patterns of rod and cone dysfunction were present in patients.Frequently, there were midperipheral losses with residual rod and cone functionin central and peripheral retina. Longitudinal data indicated that central rodloss preceded peripheral rod losses. Central cone-only vision with no peripheral function was a late stage. Less commonly, patients had central rod and conedysfunction, but preserved, albeit abnormal, midperipheral rod and cone vision.Rpgr-cko mice had progressive retinal degeneration detectable in the first monthsof life. ERGs indicated relatively equal rod and cone disease. At late stages,there was greater inferior versus superior retinal degeneration.CONCLUSIONS: RPGR mutations lead to progressive loss of rod and cone vision, but show different patterns of residual photoreceptor disease expression. Knowledge of the patterns should guide treatment strategies. Rpgr-cko mice had onset of degeneration at relatively young ages and progressive photoreceptor disease. The natural history in this model will permit preclinical proof-of-concept studies to be designed and such studies should advance progress toward human therapy.
-------------------------------------

10009026_234 - 0.906488982762 - science
[vitro, vivo, times, biochemistry, metabolism, enzyme, understood, kinetics, revisited]

Testing Biochemistry Revisited: How In Vivo Metabolism Can Be Understood from In Vitro Enzyme Kinetics
Times Cited: 1
-------------------------------------

10010340_234 - 0.791556049666 - science
[gene, cpk, cluster, abcpk, novel, scbr2, ycpk, deletion]

Deletion of a regulatory gene within the cpk gene cluster reveals novel antibacterial activity in Streptomyces coelicolor A3(2)
Genome sequencing of Streptomyces coelicolor A3(2) revealed an uncharacterized type I polyketide synthase gene cluster (cpk). Here we describe the discovery of a novel antibacterial activity (abCPK) and a yellow-pigmented secondary metabolite (yCPK) after deleting a presumed pathway-specific regulatory gene (scbR2) that encodes a member of the ??-butyrolactone receptor family of proteins and which lies in the cpk gene cluster. Overproduction of yCPK and abCPK in a scbR2 deletion mutant, and the absence of the newly described compounds from cpk deletion mutants, suggest that they are products of the previously orphan cpk biosynthetic pathway in which abCPK is converted into the yellow pigment. Transcriptional analysis suggests that scbR2 may act in a negative feedback mechanism to eventually limit yCPK biosynthesis. The results described here represent a novel approach for the discovery of new, biologically active compounds. ?? 2010 SGM.
-------------------------------------

10003990_234 - 0.714395686326 - science
[pain, cwp, variant, genetic, association]

Genome-wide association study meta-analysis of chronic widespread pain: evidence for involvement of the 5p15.2 region.
BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Chronic widespread pain (CWP) is a common disorder affecting ∼10% of the general population and has an estimated heritability of 48-52%. In the first large-scale genome-wide association study (GWAS) meta-analysis, we aimed to identify common genetic variants associated with CWP. METHODS: We conducted a GWAS meta-analysis in 1308 female CWP cases and 5791 controls of European descent, and replicated the effects of the genetic variants with suggestive evidence for association in 1480 CWP cases and 7989 controls. Subsequently, we studied gene expression levels of the nearest genes in two chronic inflammatory pain mouse models, and examined 92 genetic variants previously described associated with pain. RESULTS: The minor C-allele of rs13361160 on chromosome 5p15.2, located upstream of chaperonin-containing-TCP1-complex-5 gene (CCT5) and downstream of FAM173B, was found to be associated with a 30% higher risk of CWP (minor allele frequency=43%; OR=1.30, 95% CI 1.19 to 1.42, p=1.2×10(-8)). Combined with the replication, we observed a slightly attenuated OR of 1.17 (95% CI 1.10 to 1.24, p=4.7×10(-7)) with moderate heterogeneity (I2=28.4%). However, in a sensitivity analysis that only allowed studies with joint-specific pain, the combined association was genome-wide significant (OR=1.23, 95% CI 1.14 to 1.32, p=3.4×10(-8), I2=0%). Expression levels of Cct5 and Fam173b in mice with inflammatory pain were higher in the lumbar spinal cord, not in the lumbar dorsal root ganglions, compared to mice without pain. None of the 92 genetic variants previously described were significantly associated with pain (p>7.7×10(-4)). CONCLUSIONS: We identified a common genetic variant on chromosome 5p15.2 associated with joint-specific CWP in humans. This work suggests that CCT5 and FAM173B are promising targets in the regulation of pain.
-------------------------------------

10003461_234 - 0.74750667215 - science
[neuronal]

Artifact versus reality--how astrocytes contribute to synaptic events.
The neuronal doctrine, developed a century ago regards neuronal networks as the sole substrate of higher brain function. Recent advances in glial physiology have promoted an alternative hypothesis, which places information processing in the brain into integrated neuronal-glial networks utilizing both binary (neuronal action potentials) and analogue (diffusional propagation of second messengers/metabolites through gap junctions or transmitters through the interstitial space) signal encoding. It has been proposed that the feed-forward and feed-back communication between these two types of neural cells, which underlies information transfer and processing, is accomplished by the release of neurotransmitters from neuronal terminals as well as from astroglial processes. Understanding of this subject, however, remains incomplete and important questions and controversies require resolution. Here we propose that the primary function of perisynaptic glial processes is to create an "astroglial cradle" that shields the synapse from a multitude of extrasynaptic signaling events and provides for multifaceted support and long-term plasticity of synaptic contacts through variety of mechanisms, which may not necessarily involve the release of "glio" transmitters.
-------------------------------------

10017772_234 - 0.945341305302 - science
[substrate, chimeric, biocatalyst, self-sufficient]

Chimeric Self-Sufficient P450cam-RhFRed Biocatalysts with Broad Substrate Scope
A high-throughput screening protocol for evaluating chimeric, self-sufficient P450 biocatalysts and their mutants against a panel of substrates was developed, leading to the identification of a number of novel biooxidation activities
-------------------------------------

10018352_234 - 0.708009420495 - science
[cell, lung, ox40, immune]

A critical role for OX40 in T cell-mediated immunopathology during lung viral infection.
Respiratory infections are the third leading cause of death worldwide. Illness is caused by pathogen replication and disruption of airway homeostasis by excessive expansion of cell numbers. One strategy to prevent lung immune-mediated damage involves reducing the cellular burden. To date, antiinflammatory strategies have affected both antigen-specific and naive immune repertoires. Here we report a novel form of immune intervention that specifically targets recently activated T cells alone. OX40 (CD134) is absent on naive T cells but up-regulated 1-2 d after antigen activation. OX40-immunoglobulin fusion proteins block the interaction of OX40 with its ligand on antigen-presenting cells and eliminate weight loss and cachexia without preventing virus clearance. Reduced proliferation and enhanced apoptosis of lung cells accompanied the improved clinical phenotype. Manipulation of this late costimulatory pathway has clear therapeutic potential for the treatment of dysregulated lung immune responses.
-------------------------------------

10017085_234 - 0.768498185721 - science
[susceptibility, psoriasis, response, genetic, psoriatic, disease, locus, arthritis, study, treatment]

Genetic susceptibility to psoriasis and psoriatic arthritis: implications for therapy.
The era of genome-wide association studies has revolutionized the search for genetic susceptibility loci in complex genetic conditions such as psoriasis. There are currently 16 loci with confirmed evidence for association with psoriasis susceptibility but there is the potential for more to be discovered as the genetic heritability of the disease has not yet been fully explained. Many of the associated loci overlap with those for psoriatic arthritis. In contrast to psoriasis susceptibility, few studies have been performed to identify predictors of drug response in psoriasis. As large-scale collaborations and registries for psoriasis and psoriatic arthritis are established, it is likely that a genome-wide approach may be used as a more effective method of searching for genetic predictors of treatment response. However, candidate gene studies will still have a role; for example, it is likely that some disease susceptibility genes will also be markers of treatment response, based on evidence from other diseases. This review summarizes recent advances in investigating the role genetics plays in psoriasis susceptibility and contrasts these to advances made in psoriatic arthritis. Further, it describes the genetics of treatment response in the two diseases and indicates how susceptibility loci could be used to identify drug response in the future.
-------------------------------------

10006918_234 - 0.903926966871 - science
[polymer, pile, effect, fluid, support, trial]

Effect of support fluids on pile performance - a field trial in east London
Synthetic polymer support fluids have been used in the UK for about a decade, although naturally derived polymers such as xanthan gum have been used for much longer. Very little research has been carried out to assess the effects of polymer fluids and especially synthetic polymers on pile performance.A field trial comprising the construction and testing of three piles has been carried out at Stratford in east London. The objectives of the trial were to compare the effects of polymer and bentonite support fluids on pile performance, to assess the effect of extended bore open time for the polymer piles, and to quantify the effect of support fluid contamination on the hardened properties of concrete. It was found that the two polymer piles significantly outperformed the bentonite pile under the maximum proof load, and that no adverse effect was caused by the extended soil-fluid exposure time in the polymer-supported bore. The two support fluids were also found to have similar effects on concrete quality.
-------------------------------------

10009340_234 - 0.818342040609 - science
[p21cip1, metastasis, cell, proliferation, invasion]

p21CIP1 mediates reciprocal switching between proliferation and invasion during metastasis.
Cell proliferation and invasion are critical for malignant progression, yet how these processes relate to each other and whether they regulate one another during metastasis is unknown. We show that invasiveness of breast cancer cells is associated with growth arrest due to p21CIP1 upregulation. Knockdown of p21CIP1 increases cell proliferation and suppresses invasion. Since p21CIP1 acts to inhibit cyclin E during cell-cycle progression, we demonstrated that a constitutively active form of cyclin E had similar effects to p21CIP1 inhibition resulting in enhanced cell growth and suppressed invasiveness. We tested these findings in vivo in the Polyoma middle T mammary tumor model in which p21CIP1 was deleted. p21CIP1 knockout mice exhibited dramatic suppression of metastasis, independent of tumor growth, which was rescued by p21CIP1. Metastasis suppression by p21CIP1 ablation was associated with striking cytoskeletal reorganization leading to a non-invasive and highly proliferative state. Thus, p21CIP1 regulates metastasis by mediating reciprocal switching between invasion and proliferation.
-------------------------------------

10009684_234 - 0.892151023389 - science
[jnk, apoptotic, bax]

The regulation of Bax by c-Jun N-terminal protein kinase (JNK) is a prerequisite to the mitochondrial-induced apoptotic pathway.
The signaling mechanism by which JNK affects mitochondria is critical to initiate apoptosis. Here we show that the absence of JNK provides a partial resistance to the toxic effect of the heavy metal cadmium. Both wild type and jnk-/- fibroblasts undergoing death exhibit cytosolic cytochrome c but, unlike wild type cells, the JNK-deficient fibroblasts do not display increased caspase activity and DNA fragmentation. The absence of apoptotic death correlates with a specific defect in activation of Bax. We conclude that JNK-dependent regulation of Bax is essential to mediate the apoptotic release of cytochrome c regardless of Bid and Bim activation.
-------------------------------------

10003977_234 - 0.859697938725 - science
[pi-stacking, hydrogen, monohydrogendiphosphopentamolybdate, ch6n3, times, guanidinium, dot, part, cation, hp2mo5o23center]

Pentaguanidinium monohydrogendiphosphopentamolybdate(VI) 2.5-hydrate, (CH6N3)(5)HP2Mo5O23center dot 2.5H(2)O: hydrogen bonding and pi-stacking in guanidinium cations
Times Cited: 0 Part 7
-------------------------------------

10010299_234 - 0.922213102819 - science
[peptide, precursor, ion, selection, sample, complex, elution, method, experiment]

Apex peptide elution chain selection: A new strategy for selecting precursors in 2D-LC-MALDI-TOF/TOF experiments on complex biological samples
{LC-MALDI} provides an often overlooked opportunity to exploit the separation between {LC-MS} and {MS/MS} stages of a {2D-LC-MS-based} proteomics experiment, that is, by making a smarter selection for precursor fragmentation. Apex Peptide Elution Chain Selection {(APECS)} is a simple and powerful method for intensity-based peptide selection in a complex sample separated by {2D-LC}, using a {MALDI-TOF/TOF} instrument. It removes the peptide redundancy present in the adjacent first-dimension (typically strong cation exchange, {SCX)} fractions by constructing peptide elution profiles that link the precursor ions of the same peptide across {SCX} fractions. Subsequently, the precursor ion most likely to fragment successfully in a given profile is selected for fragmentation analysis, selecting on precursor intensity and absence of adjacent ions that may cofragment. To make the method independent of experiment-specific tolerance criteria, we introduce the concept of the branching factor, which measures the likelihood of false clustering of precursor ions based on past experiments. By validation with a complex proteome sample of Arabidopsis thaliana, {APECS} identified an equivalent number of peptides as a conventional data-dependent acquisition method but with a 35\% smaller work load. Consequently, reduced sample depletion allowed further selection of lower signal-to-noise ratio precursor ions, leading to a larger number of identified unique peptides. ?? 2010 American Chemical Society.
-------------------------------------

10010657_234 - 0.931756303965 - science
[microbial, solid-phase, mineral-radionuclide, radionuclide, cited, times, interaction, capture, effect]

Microbial effects on mineral-radionuclide interactions and radionuclide solid-phase capture processes
Times Cited: 1
-------------------------------------

10009957_234 - 0.773199466811 - science
[serum, elisa, antigen, negative, fumigatus]

Antibody to Aspergillus fumigatus antigens in normal sera: influence on positive-negative discrimination in ELISA.
The response of precipitin-negative sera from non-selected asthmatic patients against a range of somatic and culture filtrate antigens of Aspergillus fumigatus in ELISA for anti-A. fumigatus IgG is described. Antibody to the various antigens was widely distributed but the precise distribution was dependent upon antigen type. To determine how the selection of negative reference sera from precipitin-negative sera can influence the discrimination between precipitin-positive and -negative sera in ELISA, panels of 10 sera were chosen from the extremes of the frequency distribution and by random selection. The closest agreement between precipitin testing and ELISA was seen when randomly-selected negative reference sera were incorporated in the assay, although the degree of correlation was dependent upon the detector antigen. These findings demonstrate the requirement for careful selection of sera included as negative reference sera in ELISA for anti-A. fumigatus IgG.
-------------------------------------

10003576_234 - 0.871224604959 - science
[gene, glnb, glutamine, protein, sequence, synthetase, identity, enzyme, acid]

Streptomyces hygroscopicus has two glutamine synthetase genes
Streptomyces hygroscopicus, which produces the glutamine synthetase inhibitor phosphinothricin, possesses at least two genes {(glnA} and {glnB)} encoding distinct glutamine synthetase isoforms {(GSI} and {GSII).} The {glnB} gene was cloned from S. hygroscopicus {DNA} by complementation in an Escherichia coli glutamine auxotrophic mutant {(glnA).} {glnB} was subcloned in Streptomyces plasmids by insertion into {pIJ486} {(pMSG3)} and {pIJ702} {(pMSG5).} Both constructions conferred resistance to the tripeptide form of phosphinothricin (bialaphos) and were able to complement a glutamine auxotrophic marker in S. coelicolor. Sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoretic analysis of S. {lividans(pMSG5)} revealed a highly overexpressed 40-kilodalton protein. When {GS} was purified from this strain, it was indistinguishable in apparent molecular mass from the 40-kilodalton protein. The nucleic acid sequence of the cloned region contained an open reading frame which encoded a protein whose size, amino acid composition, and N-terminal sequence corresponded to those of the purified {GS.} {glnB} had a high {G+C} content and codon usage typical of streptomycete genes. A comparison of its predicted amino acid sequence with the protein data bases revealed that it encoded a {GSII-type} enzyme which had previously been found only in various eucaryotes (47 to 50\% identity) and nodulating bacteria such as Bradyrhizobium spp. (42\% identity). {glnB} had only 13 to 18\% identity with eubacterial {GSI} enzymes. Southern blot hydridization experiments showed that sequences similar to {glnB} were present in all of the five other Streptomyces species tested, as well as Frankia species. These results do not support the previous suggestion that {GSII-type} enzymes found in members of the family Rhizobiocaea represent a unique example of interkingdom gene transfer associated with symbiosis in the nodule. Instead they imply that the presence of more than one gene encoding {GS} may be more common among soil microorganisms than previously appreciated.
-------------------------------------

10011020_234 - 0.796940259761 - science
[study, green, synchrotron, magnetite, rust, precursor]

Green rust as a precursor for magnetite: An in situ synchrotron based study
cited By (since 1996) 5
-------------------------------------

10006965_234 - 0.918684167623 - science
[gradient, transmural, protein, adult, mrna, endocardium, case, apd, change]

Postnatal development of transmural gradients in expression of ion channels and Ca²⁺-handling proteins in the ventricle.
Transmural gradients in myocyte action potential duration (APD) and Ca(2+)-handling proteins are argued to be important for both the normal functioning of the ventricle and arrhythmogenesis. In rabbit, the transmural gradient in APD (left ventricular wedge preparation) is minimal in the neonate. During postnatal development, APD increases both in the epicardium and the endocardium, but the prolongation is more substantial in the endocardium leading to a significant transmural gradient. We have investigated changes in the expression of ion channels and also Ca(2+)-handling proteins in the subepicardial and subendocardial layers of the left ventricular free wall in neonatal (2-7 days of age) and adult male (~6 months of age) New Zealand White rabbits using quantitative PCR and also, when possible, in situ hybridisation and immunohistochemistry. In the adult, there were significant and substantial transmural gradients in Ca(v)1.2, KChIP2, ERG, K(v)LQT1, K(ir)2.1, NCX1, SERCA2a and RyR2 at the mRNA and, in some cases, protein level-in every case the mRNA or protein was more abundant in the epicardium than the endocardium. Of the eight transmural gradients seen in the adult, only three were observed in the neonate and, in two of these cases, the gradients were smaller than those in the adult. However, in the neonate there were also transmural gradients not observed in the adult: in HCN4, Na(v)1.5, minK, K(ir)3.1 and Cx40 mRNAs - in every case the mRNA was more abundant in the endocardium than the epicardium. If the postnatal changes in ion channel mRNAs are used to predict changes in ionic conductances, mathematical modelling predicts the changes in APD observed experimentally. It is concluded that many of the well known transmural gradients in the ventricle develop postnatally.
-------------------------------------

10009963_234 - 0.804466850353 - science
[serum, antigen, albican, time, degree, negative, elisa, precipitin, antibody, igg]

Further evaluation of factors affecting a rapid ELISA procedure for detection of IgG antibodies to Candida albicans.
A rapid enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) was developed to detect IgG antibodies against a cytoplasmic antigen of Candida albicans. The optimum conditions and time required for each step were investigated. Pre-equilibration at 37 degrees C and constant agitation of immunoreactants resulted in a total test time of 1 h for examination of single serum dilutions. Initial binding of the antigen at 37 degrees C to the solid phase occurred within 4-6 min and was dependent on concentration. A serum dilution of 100-fold resulted in adequate discrimination between precipitin test-positive and -negative sera. Interaction of antibody and the bound antigen was maximal after 6 min incubation at 37 degrees C and was dependent upon the precipitin titre of the serum. Ten minutes was selected as the optimal incubation time for each of the stages, by which time maximal binding had occurred, irrespective of antibody affinity for antigen. The ELISA was completed by incubation at 37 degrees C for 10 min with alkaline phosphatase-conjugated anti-human IgG. Discrimination between positive and negative test sera was achieved by incorporating in each test run precipitin test-positive and -negative reference sera from groups of persons with or without C. albicans colonization or infection. Closest agreement between sera positive for C. albicans precipitins by counter-immunoelectrophoresis and the rapid ELISA was seen when reference negative sera were selected from non-colonized individuals.
-------------------------------------

10009769_234 - 0.844078283414 - science
[neuroblastoma, aspergillus, flavus, endocarditis, cardiac]

Aspergillus flavus endocarditis in a child with neuroblastoma.
We report a case of Aspergillus flavus endocarditis in a 6-year-old boy with stage IV neuroblastoma with no pre-existing cardiac disease. The infection was successfully treated with high-dose liposomal amphotericin (AmBisome) once daily. Recurrence was prevented with itraconazole oral solution once daily as maintenance therapy. Adjunctive surgery was not required. The patient's cardiac function was uncompromised, but subsequent death from progressive neuroblastoma prevented long-term follow-up.
-------------------------------------

10017410_234 - 0.740762597859 - science
[switching, surface, metric, collision, form, point, normal, euclidean, function, condition]

The border collision normal form with stochastic switching surface
The deterministic border collision normal form describes the bifurcations of a discrete time dynamical system as a fixed point moves across the switching surface with changing parameter. If the position of the switching surface varies randomly, but within some bounded region, we give conditions which imply that the attractor close to the bifurcation point is the attractor of an Iterated Function System. The proof uses an equivalent metric to the Euclidean metric because the functions involved are never contractions in the Euclidean metric. If the conditions do not hold then a range of possibilities may be realized, including local instability, and some examples are investigated numerically.
-------------------------------------

10017119_234 - 0.909177844236 - science
[tissue, cell, collagen, fibril, tendon, arhgap28, strong, scientist]

Identification of Arhgap28, a New Regulator of Stress Fibre Formation in Cells Assembling a Fibrous Extracellular Matrix
Discovery of Arhgap28, a Molecule Involved in Controlling Cell Forces Important in Making a Strong TendonMovements of the body such as running or gripping a door handle require strong tissue types such as muscle, bone, tendon, ligament and cartilage. These tissues make up the musculoskeletal system. Their ability to transmit and withstand mechanical loading is because of a rope-like protein called collagen, which surrounds the cells. Collagen is important as it allows tissues of the body to endure the constant forces of being pulled, pushed and squashed. In bone tissue, these fibrils are woven together to allow calcium to bind, which creates strong bone that can bear the weight of the body. The collagen ropes or ‘fibrils’ in tendon are bundled together like a rope so that tendons can be stretched repetitively without breaking. How the collagen fibrils are organised is linked to the function of the tissue. A disadvantage of having such a unique and strong tissue structure is that once damaged, the collagen fibrils do not fully repair, often resulting in poor healing and long-term recovery. It is estimated that the annual cost of tendon injury in the UK is £25 billion. Scientists led by Professor Karl Kadler at the University of Manchester want to understand how organisation of collagen fibrils is established during the formation of musculoskeletal tissues, so that new medical treatments to improve tissue healing may be developed. As a starting point, the scientists began studying tendon tissue. Since 2004, they have discovered that the cells that live in tendon are responsible for organising the collagen fibrils into non-crisscrossing, straight strands. They found that the cell scaffolding plays important roles in the organisation of collagen fibrils and in generating pulling forces used to make tendons strong. This PhD project investigated the idea that the organisation of the scaffolding inside the cell is responsible for determining the arrangement of the collagen fibrils outside the cell. Scientists found a gene called Arhgap28 that is more prevalent in cells when they make tendon tissues. Experiments showed that Arhgap28 could prevent the cell scaffolding from generating pulling forces. Scientists now think that Arhgap28 controls how the cell is able to touch and pull on fibrils so that they can be arranged correctly and produce a tissue that is not too stiff and not too loose. Further understanding of Arhgap28 would pave the way for improved therapeutics for musculoskeletal injuries in the future.
-------------------------------------

10007541_234 - 0.735779501235 - science
[criterion, nonlinearity, lur]

Stability Criteria for Discrete-time Lur'e Systems with Monotonic, sector- and slope-restricted nonlinearities.
This note presents new LMI-based stability criteria for the discrete-time multivariable Lur’e system with nonlinearities that are monotonic, sector- and slope-restricted. Corresponding Lur’e-Lyapunov functions are constructed for such a system. The new criteria are expressed in a reasonably general form that can be applied to both non-diagonal and diagonal nonlinearities. We explicitly compare the new approach to the existing LMI-based Popov-like criteria in the literature, and express the results in terms of an Integral Quadratic Constraint (IQC). The applications of the new criteria to some control problems and strategies are briefly discussed. Numerical examples are included to show their performance, and they are shown to be less conservative than the previous results.
-------------------------------------

10005568_234 - 0.897195321886 - science
[different, necrobiosis, nodular, crohn, disease]

'Nodular necrobiosis': a new cutaneous manifestation of Crohn's disease?
A skin lesion previously unassociated with Crohn's disease is described. Although superficially resembling erythema nodosum it runs a different clinical course and has different histological appearances, the central feature being necrobiotic collagen. The term ;nodular necrobiosis' is suggested.
-------------------------------------

10007782_234 - 0.737615900223 - science
[uptake, tumor, reference, normal, region, ratio, method, methionine, map, pet]

Evaluation of primary brain tumors using 11C-methionine PET with reference to a normal methionine uptake map.
UNLABELLED: (11)C-Methionine PET is a well-established technique for evaluating tumor extent for diagnosis and treatment planning in neurooncology. Image interpretation is typically performed using the ratio of uptake within the tumor to a reference region. The precise location of this reference region is important as local variations in methionine uptake may significantly alter the result, particularly for lesions at the border of gray and white matter. Selection of a reference region can be highly user dependant, and identifying a representative normal region may be complicated by midline or multifocal tumors. We hypothesized that current coregistration methods would enable interpretation of methionine PET images with reference to an averaged normal uptake map, allowing better standardization of scan analysis and increasing the sensitivity to tumor infiltration, particularly of white matter regions. METHODS: A normal methionine uptake map was prepared from the normal hemispheres of 20 scans performed on patients with benign or low-grade lesions. Affine and nonlinear coregistration algorithms were evaluated for spatial normalization of the images to a previously developed PET template. A standardized method for applying the normal uptake map in brain tumors was developed and evaluated in a sample of 18 scans (6 grade II, 6 grade III, and 6 grade IV gliomas). Tumor extent was compared with that derived from a mirrored contralateral reference region method. Correlation coefficients were calculated between the uptake ratios for tumor to normal uptake map versus tumor to mirrored reference region. RESULTS: "RatioMap" images depicting voxel-by-voxel ratios of a patient scan to the normal uptake map revealed increased methionine uptake in white matter regions that could not be identified using the standard method. Uptake ratios within the tumor varied slightly with the normalization methods used but correlated closely with the ratio to a single reference value. Nonlinear coregistration with median ratio intensity normalization gave the strongest correlation (r = 0.97, P < 0.001, n = 17). CONCLUSION: Evaluation of methionine PET data with reference to normal uptake data may improve sensitivity to white matter infiltration. The tumor uptake ratios obtained correlated closely with a standard reference value technique, whereas the described method allowed for better standardization of the image analysis.
-------------------------------------

10010338_234 - 0.876744617613 - science
[antibiotic, metabolite, signalling, biosynthesis, time, mutant, scba, ??, molecule, scb]

Deletion of the signalling molecule synthase ScbA has pleiotropic effects on secondary metabolite biosynthesis, morphological differentiation and primary metabolism in Streptomyces coelicolor A3(2)
Streptomycetes have high biotechnological relevance as producers of diverse metabolites widely used in medical and agricultural applications. The biosynthesis of these metabolites is controlled by signalling molecules, ??-butyrolactones, that act as bacterial hormones. In Streptomyces coelicolor, a group of signalling molecules called SCBs (S. coelicolorbutanolides) regulates production of the pigmented antibiotics coelicolor polyketide (CPK), actinorhodin and undecylprodigiosin. The ??-butyrolactone synthase ScbA is responsible for the biosynthesis of SCBs. Here we show the results of a genome-wide transcriptome analysis of a scbA deletion mutant prior to and during the transition to antibiotic production. We report a strong perturbation in the expression of three pigmented antibiotic clusters in the mutant throughout the growth curve, thus providing a molecular explanation for the antibiotic phenotype observed previously. Our study also revealed, for the first time, that the secondary metabolite cluster responsible for synthesis of the siderophore desferrioxamine is under the control of SCB signalling. Moreover, expression of the genes encoding enzymes for primary metabolism pathways, which supply antibiotic precursors and genes for morphological differentiation, was found shifted earlier in time in the mutant. In conclusion, our time series analysis demonstrates new details of the regulatory effects of the ??-butyrolactone system in Streptomyces. ?? 2010 The Authors. Journal compilation ?? 2010 Society for Applied Microbiology and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
-------------------------------------

10018370_234 - 0.901617606463 - science
[pathway, innate, classical, bacterial, immunity, complement, response, component, pathogen, igm]

The classical pathway is the dominant complement pathway required for innate immunity to Streptococcus pneumoniae infection in mice.
The complement system is an important component of the innate immune response to bacterial pathogens, including Streptococcus pneumoniae. The classical complement pathway is activated by antibody-antigen complexes on the bacterial surface and has been considered predominately to be an effector of the adaptive immune response, whereas the alternative and mannose-binding lectin pathways are activated directly by bacterial cell surface components and are considered effectors of the innate immune response. Recently, a role has been suggested for the classical pathway during innate immunity that is activated by natural IgM or components of the acute-phase response bound to bacterial pathogens. However, the functional importance of the classical pathway for innate immunity to S. pneumoniae and other bacterial pathogens, and its relative contribution compared with the alternative and mannose-binding lectin pathways has not been defined. By using strains of mice with genetic deficiencies of complement components and secretory IgM we have investigated the role of each complement pathway and natural IgM for innate immunity to S. pneumoniae. Our results show that the proportion of a population of S. pneumoniae bound by C3 depends mainly on the classical pathway, whereas the intensity of C3 binding depends on the alternative pathway. Furthermore, the classical pathway, partially targeted by the binding of natural IgM to bacteria, is the dominant pathway for activation of the complement system during innate immunity to S. pneumoniae, loss of which results in rapidly progressing septicemia and impaired macrophage activation. These data demonstrate the vital role of the classical pathway for innate immunity to a bacterial pathogen.
-------------------------------------

10009439_234 - 0.925125773622 - science
[calcification, genetic, intracranial, icc, classification, unknown, diagnostic, methodology, phenotype]

Recognisable phenotypes associated with intracranial calcification
Intracranial calcification (ICC) is often considered to be of low diagnostic specificity. We present a methodology for systematic radiological descriptive phenotyping of ICC. This technique was applied to the imaging of 140 paediatric patients with known as well as unknown genetic abnormalities. A decision tree classification system achieved domain expert agreement of 90% in the phenotypic classification of Aicardi-Goutières syndrome, cerebroretinal microangiopathy with calcification and cysts , other known and unknown genetic disorders. We propose this methodology for diagnostic inclusion/exclusion as well as the identification of new genetic phenotypes derived from neuroimaging.
-------------------------------------

10005270_234 - 0.927387896679 - science
[tendon, adhesion, flexor, cell, formation, biology]

The cellular biology of flexor tendon adhesion formation: an old problem in a new paradigm.
Intrasynovial flexor tendon injuries of the hand can frequently be complicated by tendon adhesions to the surrounding sheath, limiting finger function. We have developed a new tendon injury model in the mouse to investigate the three-dimensional cellular biology of intrasynovial flexor tendon healing and adhesion formation. We investigated the cell biology using markers for inflammation, proliferation, collagen synthesis, apoptosis, and vascularization/myofibroblasts. Quantitative immunohistochemical image analysis and three-dimensional reconstruction with cell mapping was performed on labeled serial sections. Flexor tendon adhesions were also assessed 21 days after wounding using transmission electron microscopy to examine the cell phenotypes in the wound. When the tendon has been immobilized, the mouse can form tendon adhesions in the flexor tendon sheath. The cell biology of tendon healing follows the classic wound healing response of inflammation, proliferation, synthesis, and apoptosis, but the greater activity occurs in the surrounding tissue. Cells that have multiple "fibripositors" and cells with cytoplasmic protrusions that contain multiple large and small diameter fibrils can be found in the wound during collagen synthesis. In conclusion, adhesion formation occurs due to scarring between two damaged surfaces. The mouse model for flexor tendon injury represents a new platform to study adhesion formation that is genetically tractable.
-------------------------------------

10018274_234 - 0.839822246047 - science
[itp, ditp, xtp, nucleotide]

Characterisation of multiple substrate-specific (d)ITP/XTPase and modelling of deaminated purine nucleotide metabolism
cellular processes, especially those involving DNA and RNA.To be viable, organisms possess a number of (deoxy)nucleotidephosphohydrolases, which hydrolyze these nucleotidesremoving them from the active NTP and dNTP pools.Deamination of purine bases can result in accumulation ofsuch nucleotides as ITP, dITP, XTP and dXTP. E. coli RdgB hasbeen characterised as a deoxyribonucleoside triphosphate pyrophosphohydrolasethat can act on these nucleotides. S. cerevisiaehomologue encoded by YJR069C was purified and its(d)NTPase activity was assayed using fifteen nucleotidesubstrates. ITP, dITP, and XTP were identified as major substratesand kinetic parameters measured. Inhibition by ATP,dATP and GTP were established. On the basis of experimentaland published data, modelling and simulation of ITP, dITP,XTP and dXTP metabolism was performed. (d)ITP/(d)XTPase isa new example of enzyme with multiple substrate-specificitydemonstrating that multispecificity is not a rare phenomenon.
-------------------------------------

10017883_234 - 0.848719443112 - science
[cell, syndecan-1, fascin, matrix, spike, formation, spreading]

A role for syndecan-1 in coupling fascin spike formation by thrombospondin-1.
An important role of cell matrix adhesion receptors is to mediate transmembrane coupling between extracellular matrix attachment, actin reorganization, and cell spreading. Thrombospondin (TSP)-1 is a modulatory component of matrix expressed during development, immune response, or wound repair. Cell adhesion to TSP-1 involves formation of biochemically distinct matrix contacts based on stable fascin spikes. The cell surface adhesion receptors required have not been identified. We report here that antibody clustering of syndecan-1 proteoglycan specifically transduces organization of cortical actin and fascin bundles in several cell types. Transfection of COS-7 cells with syndecan-1 is sufficient to stimulate cell spreading, fascin spike assembly, and extensive protrusive lateral ruffling on TSP-1 or on syndecan-1 antibody. The underlying molecular mechanism depends on glycosaminoglycan (GAG) modification of the syndecan-1 core protein at residues S45 or S47 for cell membrane spreading and on the VC2 region of the cytoplasmic domain for spreading and fascin spike formation. Expression of the VC2 deletion mutant or GAG-negative syndecan-1 showed that syndecan-1 is necessary in spreading and fascin spike formation by C2C12 cells on TSP-1. These results establish a novel role for syndecan-1 protein in coupling a physiological matrix ligand to formation of a specific matrix contact structure.
-------------------------------------

10009367_234 - 0.823229592309 - science
[ph, susceptibility, azole, glabra, agent]

Effect of pH on in vitro susceptibility of Candida glabrata and Candida albicans to 11 antifungal agents and implications for clinical use.
The treatment of vulvovaginal candidiasis (VVC) due to Candida glabrata is challenging, with limited therapeutic options. Unexplained disappointing clinical efficacy has been reported with systemic and topical azole antifungal agents in spite of in vitro susceptibility. Given that the vaginal pH of patients with VVC is unchanged at 4 to 4.5, we studied the effect of pH on the in vitro activity of 11 antifungal agents against 40 C. glabrata isolates and compared activity against 15 fluconazole-sensitive and 10 reduced-fluconazole-susceptibility C. albicans strains. In vitro susceptibility to flucytosine, fluconazole, voriconazole, posaconazole, itraconazole, ketoconazole, clotrimazole, miconazole, ciclopirox olamine, amphotericin B, and caspofungin was determined using the CLSI method for yeast susceptibility testing. Test media were buffered to pHs of 7, 6, 5, and 4. Under conditions of reduced pH, C. glabrata isolates remained susceptible to caspofungin and flucytosine; however, there was a dramatic increase in the MIC(90) for amphotericin B and every azole drug tested. Although susceptible to other azole drugs tested at pH 7, C. albicans strains with reduced fluconazole susceptibility also demonstrated reduced susceptibility to amphotericin B and all azoles at pH 4. In contrast, fluconazole-sensitive C. albicans isolates remained susceptible at low pH to azoles, in keeping with clinical observations. In selecting agents for treatment of recurrent C. glabrata vaginitis, clinicians should recognize the limitations of in vitro susceptibility testing utilizing pH 7.0.
-------------------------------------

10018176_234 - 0.793166919023 - science
[tc, sediment, concentration]

The fate of technetium in reduced estuarine sediments: Combining direct and indirect analyses
Technetium-99 is an important fission product in radioactive wastes. As Tc(VII)O-4(-), Tc is highly mobile in oxic environments but, under reducing conditions, Tc becomes strongly associated with sediments as hydrous Tc(IV)O-2 like phases. In order to further examine the behaviour of Tc over a range of concentrations in estuarine sediments, anoxic incubation experiments were combined with a range of direct (transmission electron microscopy and gamma camera imaging) and indirect (incubation experiments and chemical extractions) experimental techniques. When TcO4- was incubated in sediment microcosms at micro-molar (10(-6) mol L-1) concentrations, >99\% TcO4- was removed from solution over the course of 36 days in systems undergoing active microbial Fe(III)-reduction. By contrast, when spiked into pre-reduced estuarine sediments that were predominantly Fe(III)-reducing (incubated for 60 days) or SO42-reducing (incubated for 270 days), >99\% TcO4- was removed from solution in under 10 min in both Microbially active and heat sterilised systems. Chemical extraction techniques showed that 70 +/- 3\% of Tc bound to sediments was remobilised when sediments were exposed to the first strong oxidant (H2O2) in the extraction scheme. At higher Tc concentrations (similar to 0.05 mol kg(-1) of sediment) scanning transmission electron microscopy, combined with energy dispersive X-ray mapping, was used to examine the associations of Tc in sediments. At these concentrations, Tc was localised and co-associated with nanometre size Fe(II)-rich particles, consistent with the hypothesis that removal of Tc may be controlled by reduction of Tc(VII) to Tc(IV) by biogenic Fe(II) in sediments. In addition, gamma camera imaging with the gamma-emitting (TcO4-)-Tc-99m (half-life 6 h) at pico-molar (10(-12) mol L-1) concentrations, was used to visualise the interaction of Tc in sediments at very low concentrations. Here, over the course of 24 h the scavenging of Tc to SO42-reducing sediments was observed. As the Tc concentrations used in the Tc-99m experiments were below the solubility limits for hydrous Tc(IV)O-2 (ca. 10(-9) mol L-1 at pH 7-9), sorption of Tc(IV) species is likely to be a significant control on Tc behaviour in these sediments even at very low concentrations. Overall, the results of this study show that multiple approaches are essential to understanding Tc speciation in complex heterogeneous sediments over the wide range of concentrations relevant to contaminated natural and engineered environments. (C) 2009 Published by Elsevier Ltd.
-------------------------------------

10013569_234 - 0.916752531507 - science
[peroxisome, yeast, pathway, lysine, datum, biosynthesis, physiological, peroxisome-deficient]

Loss of compartmentalization causes misregulation of lysine biosynthesis in peroxisome-deficient yeast cells
To characterize the metabolic role of peroxisomes in yeast cells under physiological conditions, we performed a comprehensive meta-analysis of published microarray data. Previous studies of yeast peroxisomes have mainly been focused on the function of peroxisomes under extreme conditions, such as growth on oleate or methanol as the sole carbon source, and may therefore not be representative of the normal physiological role of yeast peroxisomes. Surprisingly, our analysis of the microarray data reveals that the only pathway responding to peroxisome deficiency in mid-log phase is lysine biosynthesis, whereas classical peroxisomal pathways such as beta-oxidation are unaffected. We show that the upregulation of lysine biosynthesis genes in peroxisome-deficient yeasts shares many characteristics with the physiological response to lysine starvation. We provide data that suggest that this is the result of a "pathological" stimulation of the Lys14p transcriptional activator by the pathway intermediate aminoadipate semialdehyde. Mistargeting of the peroxisomal lysine pathway to the cytosol increases the active concentration of aminoadipate semialdehyde, which is no longer contained in the peroxisome and can now activate Lys14p at much lower levels than in wild-type yeasts. This is the first well-documented example of pathway misregulation in response to peroxisome deficiency and will be useful in understanding the phenotypic details of human peroxisome-deficient patients (Zellweger syndrome).
-------------------------------------

10004051_234 - 0.73127198157 - science
[protein, study, tim9, system, precursor, import, ims, mitochondrium, mitochondrial, tim]

Investigation into the molecular mechanisms of import of mitochondrial small Tim proteins
Protein import is essential for the biogenesis of mitochondria, as the majority (99%) of mitochondrial proteins is synthesized in the cytosol and thus, have to be imported into mitochondria for their function. The biogenesis of many cysteine-containing proteins of the mitochondrial intermembrane space (IMS), such as members of the small TIM and Cox17 families, is regulated by their thiol-disulphide redox state. Only the Cys-reduced precursors can be imported into mitochondria, whereas oxidised forms cannot. Their import and oxidative folding in the IMS is driven by the IMS disulphide relay system, known as mitochondrial import and assembly (MIA) pathway, whose central components are the oxidoreductase Mia40 and the sulphydryl oxidase Erv1. Currently, little is known about how the MIA precursors are maintained in the cytosol in an import-competent form, and whether they interact with the translocase of the outer membrane (TOM complex) to enter the IMS. In addition, the MIA-mediated protein folding events occurring in the IMS that lead to the generation of fully oxidised substrates are still under investigation.  Using Tim9 and yeast as models, studies presented in this thesis showed that Tim9 binding to the mitochondrial outer membrane does not depend on the receptors of the TOM complex, and occurs without regarding to the redox state of the precursor proteins. In addition, it is shown that the oxidised and reduced precursors share the same binding site on the outer membrane, and that this binding site is not important for the translocation process across the OM (Chapter 3).   Studies in this thesis investigated the role of the cytosolic thioredoxin and glutaredoxin systems in the biogenesis of mitochondria. Firstly, in vivo studies provided the evidence that the cytosolic thioredoxin system but not the glutaredoxin system is required for growth of yeast cells under respiratory conditions. Secondly, in vivo studies provided the first proof that the Trx system is required for the biogenesis of small Tim proteins. In vitro studies confirmed that the Trx1 system facilitates import of small Tim proteins into isolated mitochondria by maintaining the precursors in a reduced and therefore competent form (Chapter 5). Finally, in vitro studies showed that Mia40 is able to promote the full oxidation of Tim9. Efficient release of Tim9 from Mia40 required the presence of all cysteine residues of Tim9, as effective oxidation and concomitant release from Mia40 failed upon mutation of single cysteine residues. Finally, the study showed that reduced glutathione resolved rapidly the Mia40-Tim9 mixed-disulphide complexes, probably accelerating and/or promoting the Tim9 oxidative (Chapter 4).
-------------------------------------

10011083_234 - 0.828015230856 - science
[assay, stem, tissue, cell, mammosphere, activity]

A detailed mammosphere assay protocol for the quantification of breast stem cell activity.
Since the discovery that neural tissue contains a population of stem cells that form neurospheres in vitro, sphere-forming assays have been adapted for use with a number of different tissue types for the quantification of stem cell activity and self-renewal. One tissue type widely used for stem cell investigations is mammary tissue, and the mammosphere assay has been used in both normal tissue and cancer. Although it is a relatively simple assay to learn, it can be difficult to master. There are methodological and analytical aspects to the assay which require careful consideration when interpreting the results. We describe here a detailed mammosphere assay protocol for the assessment of stem cell activity and self-renewal, and discuss how data generated by the assay can be analysed and interpreted.
-------------------------------------

10004036_234 - 0.924477613464 - science
[peptide, proteomic, cleavage, proteolytic, surrogate, tool, protein, quantitative]

Prediction of missed proteolytic cleavages for the selection of surrogate peptides for quantitative proteomics.
Abstract Quantitative proteomics experiments are usually performed using proteolytic peptides as surrogates for their parent proteins, inferring protein amounts from peptide-level quantitation. This process is frequently dependent on complete digestion of the parent protein to its limit peptides so that their signal is truly representative. Unfortunately, proteolysis is often incomplete, and missed cleavage peptides are frequently produced that are unlikely to be optimal surrogates for quantitation, particularly for label-mediated approaches seeking to derive absolute values. We have generated a predictive computational tool that is able to predict which candidate proteolytic peptide bonds are likely to be missed by the standard enzyme trypsin. Our cross-validated prediction tool uses support vector machines and achieves high accuracy in excess of 0.94 precision (PPV), with attendant high sensitivity of 0.79, across multiple proteomes. We believe this is a useful tool for selecting candidate quantotypic peptides, seeking to minimize likely loss owing to missed cleavage, which will be a boon for quantitative proteomic pipelines as well as other areas of proteomics. Our results are discussed in the context of recent results examining the kinetics of missed cleavages in proteomic digestion protocols, and show agreement with observed experimental trends. The software has been made available at http://king.smith.man.ac.uk/mcpred .
-------------------------------------

10009972_234 - 0.85255440448 - science
[blastospore, extracellular]

Differentiation of extracellular from ingested Candida albicans blastospores in phagocytosis tests by staining with fluorescein-labelled concanavalin A.
In phagocytosis tests with human polymorphonuclear (PMN) cells, extracellular blastospores of Candida albicans could be distinguished microscopically from ingested blastospores mor easily than with methods used previously by staining phagocyte monolayers with fluorescent-labelled concanavalin A. This stain reacted with the cell wall mannan of extracellular blastospores but seemed unable to reach that of the ingested blastospores. This technique both improves determination of phagocytic indices and checks that extracellular blastospores have been washed away before assessment of intracellular survival and growth.
-------------------------------------

10008662_234 - 0.758028064052 - science
[mutation, pik3ca, cfdna, cancer, breast, tumour, patient, pi3k]

Detection of PIK3CA mutations in circulating free DNA in patients with breast cancer.
Somatic mutations in PIK3CA (encoding a class I phosphoinositide 3 kinase (PI3K) subunit) modulate PI3K signalling to influence tumour behaviour and occur in up to 40% of breast cancers. Inhibitors of PI3K signalling are entering clinical trials, but the impact of PIKC3A mutation on tumour response has yet to be clarified. This study investigated the potential utility of circulating free DNA (cfDNA) as a source for PIK3CA mutation detection in patients with breast cancer. cfDNA extracted (QIAamp Virus spin kit) from blood and matched archival tumour from 46 patients with metastatic breast cancer and 30 patients with localised, operable breast cancer was assessed for hotspot PIK3CA mutations using Amplification Refractory Mutation System (ARMS()) allele-specific PCR and Scorpion probes. PIK3CA mutations were detected in 13/46 (28%) plasma-derived and 10/46 (21%) serum-derived cfDNA samples from metastatic breast cancer patients. In 41 cases with matched tumour and plasma-derived cfDNA data, concordance (same mutation status in plasma and tumour) was 95%. Where a PIK3CA mutation was present in tumour, the 'pick up' in plasma-derived cfDNA was 80%. PIK3CA mutations were present in tumours from 14/30 (47%) localised breast cancers, but no PIK3CA mutations were detected in matched cfDNA. These data demonstrate feasibility and potential utility of cfDNA for PIK3CA mutation detection in patients with metastatic breast cancer. Studies are underway to qualify PIK3CA mutation in cfDNA as a predictive biomarker allowing patient stratification in clinical trials of mechanism-based therapeutics that target PI3K signalling pathways.
-------------------------------------

10007354_234 - 0.958305389304 - science
[enol, nucleophilic]

Tertiary alcohols by tandem β-carbolithiation and N→C aryl migration in enol carbamates.
Enol carbamates (O-vinylcarbamates) derived from aromatic or α,β-unsaturated compounds and bearing an N-aryl substituent undergo carbolithiation by nucleophilic attack at the (nominally nucleophilic) β position of the enol double bond. The resulting carbamate-stabilized allylic, propargylic, or benzylic organolithium rearranges with N→C migration of the N-aryl substituent, creating a quaternary carbon α to O. The products may be readily hydrolyzed to yield multiply branched tertiary alcohols in a one-pot tandem reaction, effectively a polarity-reversed nucleophilic β-alkylation-electrophilic α-arylation of an enol equivalent.
-------------------------------------

10010586_234 - 0.854437992433 - science
[metabolic, datum, modeling, time, gene, switch, flux, antibiotic]

Metabolic modeling and analysis of the metabolic switch in Streptomyces coelicolor
Background: The transition from exponential to stationary phase in Streptomyces coelicolor is accompanied by a major metabolic switch and results in a strong activation of secondary metabolism. Here we have explored the underlying reorganization of the metabolome by combining computational predictions based on constraint-based modeling and detailed transcriptomics time course observations.Results: We reconstructed the stoichiometric matrix of S. coelicolor, including the major antibiotic biosynthesis pathways, and performed flux balance analysis to predict flux changes that occur when the cell switches from biomass to antibiotic production. We defined the model input based on observed fermenter culture data and used a dynamically varying objective function to represent the metabolic switch. The predicted fluxes of many genes show highly significant correlation to the time series of the corresponding gene expression data. Individual mispredictions identify novel links between antibiotic production and primary metabolism.Conclusion: Our results show the usefulness of constraint-based modeling for providing a detailed interpretation of time course gene expression data. ?? 2010 Alam et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd.
-------------------------------------

10007186_234 - 0.786115519968 - science
[method, modulus, pile, test, load, concrete]

Critical assessment of pile modulus determination methods
The elastic modulus of a concrete pile is an important parameter for the interpretation of load test results. This paper summarizes and assesses the methods available for its determination. Ten methods have been identified of which four are based on laboratory tests and the remainder on in situ pile instrumentation. Six of the methods have been used to interpret the modulus of a concrete pile subject to an axial load test. From the analyses, it was found that creep strains that developed during load-holding periods can have a significant effect on the modulus value if not allowed for when assessing the measured strain values. Based on a comparison of the derived pile loads the secant modulus method was found to be the most satisfactory. The tangent modulus method was also found to be a useful tool for investigating the effect of a partial steel casing — a feature of the method that has not been discussed before. Surprisingly, the theoretically correct transformed area equation had the worst performance, probably because of the chosen method for obtaining the concrete specimens on site.
-------------------------------------

10011520_234 - 0.790767675223 - science
[gene, study, xenopus, embryo, function, method, knockdown]

Reverse genetic studies using antisense morpholino oligonucleotides.
Here we present a protocol, which allows loss-of-function studies in Xenopus embryos using antisense morpholino oligonucleotides (MOs). Gene knockdown studies provide a critical method for assessing gene function in vitro and in vivo. Such studies are currently performed in Xenopus using primarily one of the two main methods: (1) overexpression of dominant negative constructs or (2) inhibition of gene function by using MOs targeting either the initiation of translation or mRNA splicing. While a dominant negative approach is very effective, it often suffers from specificity. Given that MOs target very specific nucleotide sequences in the target RNA, it suffers considerably less from issues of specificity. The most convenient method for introducing MOs into embryos is through microinjection, which is a simple procedure. Therefore, a reverse genetics approach in Xenopus using MOs is an extremely powerful tool to study gene function, particularly when taking advantage of available sequence data in the post-genomic era. Furthermore, given the well-established fate map in Xenopus, it is also very easy to generate mosaic knockdown embryos, where the gene of interest is affected in defined regions of the embryo. Finally it should be noted that MOs can also be used to block miRNA function and processing, so that it provides a convenient method to not only perform gene knockdown studies on protein coding genes, but also noncoding genes. The protocol we describe here is for both Xenopus laevis and Xenopus tropicalis.
-------------------------------------

10011423_234 - 0.885510523431 - science
[azole, gene, insertion, action]

Identification of novel genes conferring altered azole susceptibility                    in Aspergillus fumigatus.
Azoles are currently the mainstay of antifungal treatment both in                        agricultural and in clinical settings. Although the target site of azole                        action is well studied, the basis of azole resistance and the ultimate mode                        of action of the drug in fungi are poorly understood. To gain a deeper                        insight into these aspects of azole action, restriction-mediated plasmid                        integration (REMI) was used to create azole sensitive and resistant strains                        of the clinically important fungus Aspergillus fumigatus. Four azole                        sensitive insertions and four azole-resistant insertions were characterized.                        Three phenotypes could be re-created in wild-type AF210 by reintegration of                        rescued plasmid and a further four could be confirmed by complementation of                        the mutant phenotype with a copy of the wild-type gene predicted to be                        disrupted by the original insertional event. Six insertions were in genes                        not previously associated with azole sensitivity or resistance. Two                        insertions occur in transporter genes that may affect drug efflux, whereas                        others may affect transcriptional regulation of sterol biosynthesis genes                        and NADH metabolism in the mitochondrion. Two insertions are in genes of                        unknown function.
-------------------------------------

10010347_234 - 0.863749450553 - science
[switch, gene, metabolic, antibiotic, expression]

The dynamic architecture of the metabolic switch in Streptomyces coelicolor
Background: During the lifetime of a fermenter culture, the soil bacterium S. coelicolor undergoes a major metabolic switch from exponential growth to antibiotic production. We have studied gene expression patterns during this switch, using a specifically designed Affymetrix genechip and a high-resolution time-series of fermenter-grown samples.Results: Surprisingly, we find that the metabolic switch actually consists of multiple finely orchestrated switching events. Strongly coherent clusters of genes show drastic changes in gene expression already many hours before the classically defined transition phase where the switch from primary to secondary metabolism was expected. The main switch in gene expression takes only 2 hours, and changes in antibiotic biosynthesis genes are delayed relative to the metabolic rearrangements. Furthermore, global variation in morphogenesis genes indicates an involvement of cell differentiation pathways in the decision phase leading up to the commitment to antibiotic biosynthesis.Conclusions: Our study provides the first detailed insights into the complex sequence of early regulatory events during and preceding the major metabolic switch in S. coelicolor, which will form the starting point for future attempts at engineering antibiotic production in a biotechnological setting. ?? 2010 Nieselt et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd.
-------------------------------------

10003324_234 - 0.716977000379 - science
[gene, part, polymorphism, ibs-d, pi-ib, hv, snp, tnfsf15, tnf, expression]

Identifying and testing candidate genetic polymorphisms in the irritable bowel syndrome (IBS): association with TNFSF15 and TNFα
OBJECTIVES: The postinfectious irritable bowel syndrome (PI-IBS) suggests that impaired resolution of inflammation could cause IBS symptoms. The authors hypothesised that polymorphisms in genes whose expression were altered by gastroenteritis might be linked to IBS with diarrhoea (IBS-D) which closely resembles PI-IBS. DESIGN: Part 1: 25 healthy volunteers (HVs), 21 patients 6 months after Campylobacter jejuni infection, 37 IBS-D and 19 IBS with constipation (IBS-C) underwent rectal biopsy for gene expression analysis and peripheral blood mononuclear cell cytokine production assessment. Part 2: Polymorphisms in genes whose expression was altered in Part 1 were assessed in 179 HV, 179 IBS-D, 122 IBS-C and 41 PI-IBS. RESULTS: Part 1: Mucosal expression of seven genes was altered in IBS: CCL11, CCL13, Calpain 8 and TNFSF15 increased while NR1D1, GPR161 and GABRE decreased with similar patterns after infection with C jejuni. Part 2: The authors assessed 21 known single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in these seven genes and one SNP in each of the TNFα and IL-10 genes. Three out of five TNFSF15 SNPs (rs6478108, rs6478109 and rs7848647) showed reduced minor allele frequency (MAF) (0.28, 0.27 and 0.27) in subjects with IBS-D compared with HV (0.38, 0.36 and 0.37; p=0.007, 0.015 and 0.007, respectively) confirming others recent findings. The authors also replicated the previously reported association of the TNFα SNP rs1800629 with PI-IBS which showed an increase in the MAF at 0.30 versus 0.19 for HV (p=0.04). CONCLUSION: IBS-D and PI-IBS patients are associated with TNFSF15 and TNFα genetic polymorphisms which also predispose to Crohn's disease suggesting possible common underlying pathogenesis.
-------------------------------------

10018337_234 - 0.822963432438 - science
[rsv, ctl, cd8, mucosal, peptide, viral, response, mouse, clearance, adjuvant]

Mucosal delivery of a respiratory syncytial virus CTL peptide with enterotoxin-based adjuvants elicits protective, immunopathogenic, and immunoregulatory antiviral CD8+ T cell responses.
In an effort to develop a safe and effective vaccine against respiratory syncytial virus (RSV), we used Escherichia coli heat-labile toxin (LT), and LTK63 (an LT mutant devoid of ADP-ribosyltransferase activity) to elicit murine CD8(+) CTL responses to an intranasally codelivered CTL peptide from the second matrix protein (M2) of RSV. M2(82-90)-specific CD8(+) T cells were detected by IFN-gamma enzyme-linked immunospot and (51)Cr release assay in local and systemic lymph nodes, and their induction was dependent on the use of a mucosal adjuvant. CTL elicited by peptide immunization afforded protection against RSV challenge, but also enhanced weight loss. CTL-mediated viral clearance was not dependent on IFN-gamma since depletion using specific mAb during RSV challenge did not affect cellular recruitment or viral clearance. Depletion of IFN-gamma did, however, reduce the concentration of TNF detected in lung homogenates of challenged mice and largely prevented the weight loss associated with CTL-mediated viral clearance. Mice primed with the attachment glycoprotein (G) develop lung eosinophilia after intranasal RSV challenge. Mucosal peptide vaccination reduced pulmonary eosinophilia in mice subsequently immunized with G and challenged with RSV. These studies emphasize that protective and immunoregulatory CD8(+) CTL responses can be mucosally elicited using enterotoxin-based mucosal adjuvants but that resistance against viral infection may be accompanied by enhanced disease.
-------------------------------------

10011646_234 - 0.863749450553 - science
[switch, gene, metabolic, antibiotic, expression]

The dynamic architecture of the metabolic switch in Streptomyces coelicolor
Background: During the lifetime of a fermenter culture, the soil bacterium S. coelicolor undergoes a major metabolic switch from exponential growth to antibiotic production. We have studied gene expression patterns during this switch, using a specifically designed Affymetrix genechip and a high-resolution time-series of fermenter-grown samples.Results: Surprisingly, we find that the metabolic switch actually consists of multiple finely orchestrated switching events. Strongly coherent clusters of genes show drastic changes in gene expression already many hours before the classically defined transition phase where the switch from primary to secondary metabolism was expected. The main switch in gene expression takes only 2 hours, and changes in antibiotic biosynthesis genes are delayed relative to the metabolic rearrangements. Furthermore, global variation in morphogenesis genes indicates an involvement of cell differentiation pathways in the decision phase leading up to the commitment to antibiotic biosynthesis.Conclusions: Our study provides the first detailed insights into the complex sequence of early regulatory events during and preceding the major metabolic switch in S. coelicolor, which will form the starting point for future attempts at engineering antibiotic production in a biotechnological setting. ?? 2010 Nieselt et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd.
-------------------------------------

10011735_234 - 0.754248423122 - science
[neuron, processor, time, biological]

SpiNNaker: Distributed Computer Engineering for Neuromorphics
SpiNNaker is a biologically-inspired massively-parallel computer architecture optimized specifically for modeling large-scale systems of spiking neurons in biological real time. The biological inspiration is manifest in the lightweight inter-processor communications architecture, which enables a “spike” generated by a neuron modeled on one processor to be transmitted to all of the processors modeling neurons that the source neuron connects to in zero biological time (which we take to be a time much less than a millisecond). The design of such a machine is based upon achieving a balance between the processing power required to execute the neuron and synapse models, the memory hierarchy required to maintain neuron and synapse state sufficiently close to the respective processor, and a communications infrastructure that can meet the latency and bandwidth constraints of the target application.
-------------------------------------

10003467_234 - 0.793150088505 - science
[astrocyte, loss, disease, neuron]

Neurological diseases as primary gliopathies: a reassessment of neurocentrism.
Diseases of the human brain are almost universally attributed to malfunction or loss of nerve cells. However, a considerable amount of work has, during the last decade, expanded our view on the role of astrocytes in CNS (central nervous system), and this analysis suggests that astrocytes contribute to both initiation and propagation of many (if not all) neurological diseases. Astrocytes provide metabolic and trophic support to neurons and oligodendrocytes. Here, we shall endeavour a broad overviewing of the progress in the field and forward the idea that loss of homoeostatic astroglial function leads to an acute loss of neurons in the setting of acute insults such as ischaemia, whereas more subtle dysfunction of astrocytes over periods of months to years contributes to epilepsy and to progressive loss of neurons in neurodegenerative diseases. The majority of therapeutic drugs currently in clinical use target neuronal receptors, channels or transporters. Future therapeutic efforts may benefit by a stronger focus on the supportive homoeostatic functions of astrocytes.
-------------------------------------

10007008_234 - 0.713300033216 - science
[aerosol, absorption, measurement, organic, scattering, carbon]

Aerosol scattering and absorption during the EUCAARI-LONGREX flights of the Facility for Airborne Atmospheric Measurements (FAAM) BAe-146: can measurements and models agree?
Scattering and absorption by aerosol in anthropogenically perturbed air masses over Europe has been measured using instrumentation flown on the UK's BAe-146-301 large Atmospheric Research Aircraft (ARA) operated by the Facility for Airborne Atmospheric Measurements (FAAM) on 14 flights during the EUCAARI-LONGREX campaign in May 2008. The geographical and temporal variations of the derived shortwave optical properties of aerosol are presented. Values of single scattering albedo of dry aerosol at 550 nm varied considerably from 0.86 to near unity, with a campaign average of 0.93 +/- 0.03. Dry aerosol optical depths ranged from 0.030 +/- 0.009 to 0.24 +/- 0.07. An optical properties closure study comparing calculations from composition data and Mie scattering code with the measured properties is presented. Agreement to within measurement uncertainties of 30\% can be achieved for both scattering and absorption, but the latter is shown to be sensitive to the refractive indices chosen for organic aerosols, and to a lesser extent black carbon, as well as being highly dependent on the accuracy of the absorption measurements. Agreement with the measured absorption can be achieved either if organic carbon is assumed to be weakly absorbing, or if the organic aerosol is purely scattering and the absorption measurement is an overestimate due to the presence of large amounts of organic carbon. Refractive indices could not be inferred conclusively due to this uncertainty, despite the enhancement in methodology compared to previous studies that derived from the use of the black carbon measurements. Hygroscopic growth curves derived from the wet nephelometer indicate moderate water uptake by the aerosol with a campaign mean f (RH) value (ratio in scattering) of 1.5 (range from 1.23 to 1.63) at 80\% relative humidity. This value is qualitatively consistent with the major chemical components of the aerosol measured by the aerosol mass spectrometer, which are primarily mixed organics and nitrate and some sulphate.
-------------------------------------

10003288_234 - 0.878993028268 - science
[cell, mitochondrial, epidermal, stem, chain, function]

The mitochondrial electron transport chain is dispensable for proliferation and differentiation of epidermal progenitor cells.
Tissue stem cells and germ line or embryonic stem cells were shown to have reduced oxidative metabolism, which was proposed to be an adaptive mechanism to reduce damage accumulation caused by reactive oxygen species. However, an alternate explanation is that stem cells are less dependent on specialized cytoplasmic functions compared with differentiated cells, therefore, having a high nuclear-to-cytoplasmic volume ratio and consequently a low mitochondrial content. To determine whether stem cells rely or not on mitochondrial respiration, we selectively ablated the electron transport chain in the basal layer of the epidermis, which includes the epidermal progenitor/stem cells (EPSCs). This was achieved using a loxP-flanked mitochondrial transcription factor A (Tfam) allele in conjunction with a keratin 14 Cre transgene. The epidermis of these animals (Tfam(EKO)) showed a profound depletion of mitochondrial DNA and complete absence of respiratory chain complexes. However, despite a short lifespan due to malnutrition, epidermal development and skin barrier function were not impaired. Differentiation of epidermal layers was normal and no proliferation defect or major increase of apoptosis could be observed. In contrast, mice with an epidermal ablation of prohibitin-2, a scaffold protein in the inner mitochondrial membrane, displayed a dramatic phenotype observable already in utero, with severely impaired skin architecture and barrier function, ultimately causing death from dehydration shortly after birth. In conclusion, we here provide unequivocal evidence that EPSCs, and probably tissue stem cells in general, are independent of the mitochondrial respiratory chain, but still require a functional dynamic mitochondrial compartment.
-------------------------------------

10011789_234 - 0.751950478436 - science
[vein, saphenous, graft, ad5-fmod, human, nih, neointimal, fibromodulin, decorin]

Adenovirus-mediated gene transfer of fibromodulin inhibits neointimal hyperplasia in an organ culture model of human saphenous vein graft disease.
Poor long-term graft patency remains a major limitation of coronary artery bypass grafting using saphenous vein aortocoronary grafts. Neointimal hyperplasia (NIH) represents the principal mechanism of graft failure; a substantial body of evidence implicates transforming growth factor-beta1 (TGF-beta1) in the pathogenesis of NIH. The small leucine-rich proteoglycans decorin and fibromodulin possess TGF-beta-antagonist activity to differing extents and with differing avidities for the isoforms of TGF-beta. We compared their ability to inhibit NIH in an ex vivo model of human saphenous vein organ culture following adenovirus-mediated gene transfer. Surgically prepared human saphenous vein segments received adenovirus expressing fibromodulin (Ad5-Fmod), decorin (Ad5-Dcn), beta-galactosidase (Ad5-lacZ) or vehicle-only. Computerized morphometry 14 days after infection revealed significantly reduced neointimal area, neointimal thickness and intima/media ratio in Ad5-Fmod- and Ad5-Dcn-infected veins. Each parameter was significantly smaller in Ad5-Fmod- than in Ad5-Dcn-exposed segments. Fibrillar collagen content and levels of biologically active TGF-beta were lower in vessels receiving Ad5-Fmod or Ad5-Dcn than in those receiving Ad5-lacZ or vehicle-only. Fibromodulin is a more potent inhibitor of NIH in cultured human saphenous vein than decorin and offers potential therapeutic benefits in saphenous vein graft failure (and possibly in other forms of accelerated atherosclerosis) by reduction of associated neointima formation.Gene Therapy advance online publication, 28 May 2009; doi:10.1038/gt.2009.63.
-------------------------------------

10010300_234 - 0.802139971183 - science
[actinomycete, essential, metabolic, enzyme, core, network, species, genome-scale, model, comparative]

Comparative genome-scale metabolic modeling of actinomycetes: The topology of essential core metabolism
Actinomycetes are highly important bacteria. On one hand, some of them cause severe human and plant diseases, on the other hand, many species are known for their ability to produce antibiotics. Here we report the results of a comparative analysis of genome-scale metabolic models of 37 species of actinomycetes. Based on in silico knockouts we generated topological and genomic maps for each organism. Combining the collection of genome-wide models, we constructed a global enzyme association network to identify both a conserved "core network" and an "essential core network" of the entire group. As has been reported for low-degree metabolites in several organisms, low-degree enzymes (in linear pathways) turn out to be generally more essential than high-degree enzymes (in metabolic hubs). ?? 2011 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
-------------------------------------

10003973_234 - 0.757372629241 - science
[times, study, structural, spectroscopic, r3pi2, tris-aryl, adduct]

A structural and spectroscopic study of tris-aryl substituted R3PI2 adducts
Times Cited: 1
-------------------------------------

10008770_234 - 0.762096153248 - science
[voriconazole, galactomannan, eucast, breakpoint, methodology, concentration, dynamic, model, mic, susceptibility]

Pharmacodynamics of voriconazole in a dynamic in vitro model of invasive pulmonary aspergillosis: implications for in vitro susceptibility breakpoints.
BACKGROUND: Voriconazole is a first-line agent for the treatment of invasive pulmonary aspergillosis (IPA). There are increasing reports of Aspergillus fumigatus isolates with reduced susceptibility to voriconazole. METHODS: An in vitro dynamic model of IPA was developed that enabled simulation of human-like voriconazole pharmacokinetics. Galactomannan was used as a biomarker. The pharmacodynamics of voriconazole against wild-type and 3 resistant strains of A. fumigatus were defined. The results were bridged to humans to provide decision support for setting breakpoints for voriconazole using Clinical Laboratory Standards Institute (CLSI) and European Committee of Antimicrobial Susceptibility Testing (EUCAST) methodologies. RESULTS: Isolates with higher minimum inhibitory concentrations (MICs) required higher area under the concentration time curves (AUCs) to achieve suppression of galactomannan. Using CLSI and EUCAST methodologies, the AUC:MIC values that achieved suppression of galactomannan were 55 and 32.1, respectively. Using CLSI and EUCAST methodologies, the trough concentration:MIC values that achieved suppression of galactomannan were 1.68 and 1, respectively. Potential CLSI breakpoints for voriconazole are ≤ 0.5 mg/L for susceptible and >1 mg/L for resistant. Potential EUCAST breakpoints for voriconazole are ≤1 mg/L for susceptible and >2 mg/L for resistant. CONCLUSIONS: This dynamic model of IPA is a useful tool to address many remaining questions related to antifungal treatment of Aspergillus spp.
-------------------------------------

10005101_234 - 0.867577622895 - science
[ventral, domain, basal, ganglion, input, computational, dopamine, striatum]

The ventral basal ganglia, a selection mechanism at the crossroads of space, strategy, and reward
The basal ganglia are often conceptualised as three parallel domains that include all the constituent nuclei. The 'ventral domain' appears to be critical for learning flexible behaviours for exploration and foraging, as it is the recipient of converging inputs from amygdala, hippocampal formation and prefrontal cortex, putatively centres for stimulus evaluation, spatial navigation, and planning/contingency, respectively. However, compared to work on the dorsal domains, the rich potential for quantitative theories and models of the ventral domain remains largely untapped, and the purpose of this review is to provide the stimulus for this work. We systematically review the ventral domain's structures and internal organisation, and propose a functional architecture as the basis for computational models. Using a full schematic of the structure of inputs to the ventral striatum (nucleus accumbens core and shell), we argue for the existence of many identifiable processing channels on the basis of unique combinations of afferent inputs. We then identify the potential information represented in these channels by reconciling a broad range of studies from the hippocampal, amygdala and prefrontal cortex literatures with known properties of the ventral striatum from lesion, pharmacological, and electrophysiological studies. Dopamine's key role in learning is reviewed within the three current major computational frameworks; we also show that the shell-based basal ganglia sub-circuits are well placed to generate the phasic burst and dip responses of dopaminergic neurons. We detail dopamine's modulation of ventral basal ganglia's inputs by its actions on pre-synaptic terminals and post-synaptic membranes in the striatum, arguing that the complexity of these effects hint at computational roles for dopamine beyond current ideas. The ventral basal ganglia are revealed as a constellation of multiple functional systems for the learning and selection of flexible behaviours and of behavioural strategies, sharing the common operations of selection-by-disinhibition and of dopaminergic modulation.
-------------------------------------

10009716_234 - 0.826612856161 - science
[isolate, resistant, resistance, azole, fumigatus, mechanism]

Azole antifungal resistance in Aspergillus fumigatus: 2008 and 2009.
OBJECTIVES: Resistance to azole antifungal drugs in Aspergillus fumigatus is now a major clinical problem in some locations. Here we update our previous experience with data from 2008-09. METHODS: We tested all A. fumigatus isolates submitted to the Mycology Reference Centre Manchester in 2008 and 2009 for susceptibility to itraconazole, voriconazole and posaconazole. We undertook CYP51A sequencing for most of the azole-resistant isolates. RESULTS: Of 230 isolates, 64 (28%) were azole resistant. In 2008 and 2009, 14% and 20% of patients had resistant isolates, respectively. During this period 62 of 64 (97%) were itraconazole resistant, 2 of 64 (3%) were only voriconazole resistant and 78% of cases were multi-azole resistant. Forty-three percent of isolates did not carry a cyp51A mutation (previously the most common azole resistance mechanism), indicating that other mechanisms must be responsible and are increasing in frequency. CONCLUSIONS: Azole resistance is evolving and growing in frequency. Established and novel mechanisms may be responsible.
-------------------------------------

10007856_234 - 0.81534655681 - science
[particle, cloud, aerosol, organic, droplet, concentration, ambient, effect, compound]

Tight coupling of particle size, number and composition in atmospheric cloud droplet activation
The substantial uncertainty in the indirect effect of aerosol particles on radiative forcing in large part arises from the influences of atmospheric aerosol particles on (i) the brightness of clouds, exerting significant shortwave cooling with no appreciable compensation in the long wave, and on (ii) their ability to precipitate, with implications for cloud cover and lifetime.Predicting the ambient conditions at which aerosol parti- cles may become cloud droplets is largely reliant on an equilibrium relationship derived by Ko ̈hler (1936). However, the theoretical basis of the relationship restricts its application to particles solely comprising involatile compounds and wa- ter, whereas a substantial fraction of particles in the real at- mosphere will contain potentially thousands of semi-volatile organic compounds in addition to containing semi-volatile inorganic components such as ammonium nitrate.We show that equilibration of atmospherically reasonable concentrations of organic compounds with a growing particle as the ambient humidity increases has potentially larger implications on cloud droplet formation than any other equilibrium compositional dependence, owing to inextricable linkage between the aerosol composition, a particles size and concentration under ambient conditions.Whilst previous attempts to account for co-condensation of gases other than water vapour have been restricted to one inorganic condensate, our method demonstrates that accounting for the co-condensation of any number of organic com- pounds substantially decreases the saturation ratio of wa- ter vapour required for droplet activation. This effect is far greater than any other compositional dependence; more so even than the unphysical effect of surface tension reductionin aqueous organic mixtures, ignoring differences in bulk and surface surfactant concentrations.
-------------------------------------

10008049_234 - 0.871556489116 - science
[proinsulin, t2d, insulin, level, fasting, glucose, locus]

Genome-wide association identifies nine common variants associated with fasting proinsulin levels and provides new insights into the pathophysiology of type 2 diabetes.
OBJECTIVE: Proinsulin is a precursor of mature insulin and C-peptide. Higher circulating proinsulin levels are associated with impaired β-cell function, raised glucose levels, insulin resistance, and type 2 diabetes (T2D). Studies of the insulin processing pathway could provide new insights about T2D pathophysiology. RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: We have conducted a meta-analysis of genome-wide association tests of ∼2.5 million genotyped or imputed single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and fasting proinsulin levels in 10,701 nondiabetic adults of European ancestry, with follow-up of 23 loci in up to 16,378 individuals, using additive genetic models adjusted for age, sex, fasting insulin, and study-specific covariates. RESULTS: Nine SNPs at eight loci were associated with proinsulin levels (P < 5 × 10(-8)). Two loci (LARP6 and SGSM2) have not been previously related to metabolic traits, one (MADD) has been associated with fasting glucose, one (PCSK1) has been implicated in obesity, and four (TCF7L2, SLC30A8, VPS13C/C2CD4A/B, and ARAP1, formerly CENTD2) increase T2D risk. The proinsulin-raising allele of ARAP1 was associated with a lower fasting glucose (P = 1.7 × 10(-4)), improved β-cell function (P = 1.1 × 10(-5)), and lower risk of T2D (odds ratio 0.88; P = 7.8 × 10(-6)). Notably, PCSK1 encodes the protein prohormone convertase 1/3, the first enzyme in the insulin processing pathway. A genotype score composed of the nine proinsulin-raising alleles was not associated with coronary disease in two large case-control datasets. CONCLUSIONS: We have identified nine genetic variants associated with fasting proinsulin. Our findings illuminate the biology underlying glucose homeostasis and T2D development in humans and argue against a direct role of proinsulin in coronary artery disease pathogenesis.
-------------------------------------

10009616_234 - 0.762311347834 - science
[biomarker, response, imaging, therapeutics, mri]

False-negative MRI biomarkers of tumour response to targeted cancer therapeutics.
BACKGROUND: Non-invasive quantitative imaging biomarkers are essential for the evaluation of novel targeted therapeutics. Before deployment in clinical trials, such imaging biomarkers require qualification, typically through pre-clinical identification of imaging-pathology correlates. METHODS: First, in investigating imaging biomarkers of invasion, the response of orthotopic murine PC3 prostate xenografts to the Src inhibitor saracatinib was assessed using susceptibility contrast MRI. Second, the longitudinal response of chemically induced rat mammary adenocarcinomas to the VEGFR2 inhibitor vandetanib was monitored by intrinsic susceptibility MRI, to identify the time window of transient vascular normalisation. RESULTS: No significant differences in fractional blood volume (%), vessel calibre (μm), native T(1) (ms) or apparent water diffusion coefficient were determined, despite reduced expression of activated Fak and paxillin in the saracatinib cohort. Treatment with vandetanib elicited a 60% antitumour response (P<0.01), 80% inhibition in vessel density (P<0.05) and reduction in hypoxia (P<0.05). There was, however, no significant change in tumour baseline R(2)* (s(-1)) or carbogen-induced ΔR(2)* with treatment. CONCLUSION: Reporting negative imaging biomarker responses is important, to avoid the risk of clinical trials using the same biomarkers being undertaken with a false expectation of success, and the abandonment of promising new therapeutics based on a false-negative imaging biomarker response being mistaken for a true-negative.
-------------------------------------

10005253_234 - 0.914179468119 - science
[keloid, senescence, scar, fibroblast]

Cellular senescence as a possible mechanism for halting progression of keloid lesions.
Keloid scarring is a consequence of aberrant wound healing that leads to expansion of the scar beyond the confines of the skin injury. Keloid scars are characterized by excessive extracellular matrix disposition, prolonged proliferation of fibroblasts, increased angiogenesis, and inflammatory cell infiltration. There is no single satisfactory treatment for keloid, and it can lead to severe disfigurements and bodily dysfunction. Thus, clarification of the mechanisms underlying keloid formation, as well as those that prevent it from behaving as a malignant tumor, has significant consequences not only for treatment of keloid but also for the prevention of malignant tumor formation. Senescence is an irreversible form of growth arrest that has been shown to play a role, both in vitro and in vivo, in preventing malignant tumorigenesis upon oncogenic stress. In this study it is shown that fibroblasts embedded inside keloid scars proliferate at a slower rate compared with either those residing at the proliferative edges of the scar or normal fibroblasts. Likewise it is demonstrated that keloid fibroblasts exhibit a cell-cycle arrest with a G2/M DNA content and a higher rate of senescence. The results also indicate that levels of the tumor suppressor protein PML are higher in the active regions of keloid. The study therefore suggests that senescence is one possible mechanism by which keloid is maintained in a benign state. On this basis, "pro-senescence therapy" should be taken into consideration when designing treatment strategies for keloid.
-------------------------------------

10009403_234 - 0.807616463922 - science
[rfm, placental, fetal, placenta, structure, woman, function, movement, insufficiency, maternal]

Maternal Perception of Reduced Fetal Movements Is Associated with Altered Placental Structure and Function
BACKGROUND: Maternal perception of reduced fetal movement (RFM) is associated with increased risk of stillbirth and fetal growth restriction (FGR). DFM is thought to represent fetal compensation to conserve energy due to insufficient oxygen and nutrient transfer resulting from placental insufficiency. To date there have been no studies of placental structure in cases of DFM. OBJECTIVE: To determine whether maternal perception of reduced fetal movements (RFM) is associated with abnormalities in placental structure and function. DESIGN: Placentas were collected from women with RFM after 28 weeks gestation if delivery occurred within 1 week. Women with normal movements served as a control group. Placentas were weighed and photographs taken. Microscopic structure was evaluated by immunohistochemical staining and image analysis. System A amino acid transporter activity was measured as a marker of placental function. Placentas from all pregnancies with RFM (irrespective of outcome) had greater area with signs of infarction (3.5% vs. 0.6%; p<0.01), a higher density of syncytial knots (p<0.001) and greater proliferation index (p<0.01). Villous vascularity (p<0.001), trophoblast area (p<0.01) and system A activity (p<0.01) were decreased in placentas from RFM compared to controls irrespective of outcome of pregnancy. CONCLUSIONS: This study provides evidence of abnormal placental morphology and function in women with RFM and supports the proposition of a causal association between placental insufficiency and RFM. This suggests that women presenting with RFM require further investigation to identify those with placental insufficiency.
-------------------------------------

10018107_234 - 0.802893337567 - science
[model, tissue, mutation, ventricular, n588k, re-entrant, transmural, wave]

Increased vulnerability of human ventricle to re-entrant excitation in hERG-linked variant 1 short QT syndrome.
The short QT syndrome (SQTS) is a genetically heterogeneous condition characterized by abbreviated QT intervals and an increased susceptibility to arrhythmia and sudden death. This simulation study identifies arrhythmogenic mechanisms in the rapid-delayed rectifier K(+) current (I(Kr))-linked SQT1 variant of the SQTS. Markov chain (MC) models were found to be superior to Hodgkin-Huxley (HH) models in reproducing experimental data regarding effects of the N588K mutation on KCNH2-encoded hERG. These ionic channel models were then incorporated into human ventricular action potential (AP) models and into 1D and 2D idealised and realistic transmural ventricular tissue simulations and into a 3D anatomical model. In single cell models, the N588K mutation abbreviated ventricular cell AP duration at 90% repolarization (APD(90)) and decreased the maximal transmural voltage heterogeneity (δV) during APs. This resulted in decreased transmural heterogeneity of APD(90) and of the effective refractory period (ERP): effects that are anticipated to be anti-arrhythmic rather than pro-arrhythmic. However, with consideration of transmural heterogeneity of I(Kr) density in the intact tissue model based on the ten Tusscher-Noble-Noble-Panfilov ventricular model, not only did the N588K mutation lead to QT-shortening and increases in T-wave amplitude, but δV was found to be augmented in some local regions of ventricle tissue, resulting in increased tissue vulnerability for uni-directional conduction block and predisposing to formation of re-entrant excitation waves. In 2D and 3D tissue models, the N588K mutation facilitated and maintained re-entrant excitation waves due to the reduced substrate size necessary for sustaining re-entry. Thus, in SQT1 the N588K-hERG mutation facilitates initiation and maintenance of ventricular re-entry, increasing the lifespan of re-entrant spiral waves and the stability of scroll waves in 3D tissue.
-------------------------------------

10011610_234 - 0.935852164855 - science
[tio2, pyrocatechol, anatase, surface, adsorption, rutile, nexaf, molecule, state]

Adsorbate-induced Modification of Surface Electronic Structure: Pyrocatechol Adsorption on the Anatase TiO2 (101) and Rutile TiO2 (110) Surfaces
Photoemission and near-edge X-ray absorption fine structure (NEXAFS) techniques have been used to study the adsorption of pyrocatechol on anatase TiO2 (101) and rutile TiO2 (110) single crystals. Photoemission results suggest the pyrocatechol molecule adsorbs on both surfaces predominantly in a bidentate geometry. Using the searchlight effect, the carbon K-edge NEXAFS spectra recorded for pyrocatechol on anatase TiO2 (101) and rutile TiO2 (110) show the phenyl rings in the pyrocatechol molecule to be oriented  at 27°±6° and 23°±8° respectively from the surface normal.  Experimental data and computational models of the pyrocatechol-anatase TiO2 interface indicate the appearance of new occupied and unoccupied states on adsorption due to hybridisation between the electronic states of the pyrocatechol molecule and the surface. The atomic character of the new orbitals created facilitates direct photoinjection  from pyrocatechol into  anatase TiO2 and induces a strong final state effect in the carbon K-edge NEXAFS spectrum.
-------------------------------------

10004017_234 - 0.746306272469 - science
[pv, anomaly, layer, precipitation, convective, convection, case, dry, deep, complex]

Large scale potential vorticity anomalies and deep convection.
The effect on deep convection of large-scale potential vorticity (PV) anomalies and their associated tropospheric stable layers is complex and not well understood. This article examines the meteorological events of 9 July 2007 (IOP7b of the Convective and Orographically-induced Precipitation Study (COPS)), which was dominated by an upper-level PV anomaly that stretched from the UK to southern France and as far northeast as Denmark. Three precipitation regions were identified from the case: lines of intense storms beneath the PV anomaly; less intense, more widespread convective precipitation to the east of the PV anomaly; and, in between, a region of no precipitation. The latter of these coincided with the high-resolution measurements andmodel analyses from COPS. The extensive and varied data analyzed in this investigation show that convective available potential energy (CAPE) was present in this region (the distribution of CAPE and convective inhibition (CIN) is presented via an innovative, pseudo-3D visualization that allows horizontal and vertical interactions to be considered). However, convection was capped by a complex arrangement of dry layers; the base of the key layer was at 750 hPa. These dry layers descended separately from the upper troposphere, moving around the PV anomaly as it developed from a breaking Rossby wave to the west during the seven days before the IOP. This case adds to other studies that show that descent of complex dry layers is an important mechanism for forming convection-inhibiting atmospheric lids in Western Europe. A simple conceptual model is developed that synthesizes the effect of large-scale PV anomalies on deep convection from a series of consistent case studies. This model has significant implications for storm forecasting and projections of storminess in future climates, as it highlights the importance of thin structures that can advect hundreds of km before having an impact.
-------------------------------------

10011653_234 - 0.734098031949 - science
[leptin, crp, level, adiposity, measure, resistance, subject]

Epidemiological evidence against a role for C-reactive protein causing leptin resistance.
OBJECTIVE: It has been suggested that elevated levels of C-reactive protein (CRP) might interfere with leptin signalling and contribute to leptin resistance. Our aim was to assess whether plasma levels of CRP influence leptin resistance in humans; and our hypothesis was that CRP levels would modify the cross-sectional relationships between leptin and measures of adiposity. DESIGN AND METHODS: We assessed 4 measures of adiposity: body mass index, waist circumference, fat mass, and % body fat in 2113 British Regional Heart Study (BRHS) men (mean (SD) age 69 (5) years), with replication in 760 (age 69 (6) years) European Male Aging Study (EMAS) subjects. RESULTS: In BRHS subjects leptin correlated with CRP (Spearman's r=0.22, p<0.0001). Leptin and CRP correlated with all 4 measures of adiposity (r-value range: 0.22 to 0.57, all p<0.0001). Age-adjusted mean levels for adiposity measures increased in relation to leptin levels; but CRP level did not consistently influence the β coefficients of the regression lines in a CRP-stratified analysis. In BRHS subjects, the BMI vs. leptin relationship demonstrated a weak statistical interaction with CRP (p=0.04). We observed no similar interaction in EMAS subjects, and no significant interactions with other measures of adiposity in BRHS or EMAS cohorts. CONCLUSION: We have shown that plasma CRP has little influence on the relationship between measures of adiposity and serum leptin levels in these middle-aged and elderly male European cohorts. This study provides epidemiological evidence against CRP having a significant role in causing leptin resistance.
-------------------------------------

10010594_234 - 0.900930927155 - science
[ncrna, antibiotic, glutamine, synthetase, noncoding, cis-encoded, production]

Noncoding RNA of glutamine synthetase I modulates antibiotic production in Streptomyces coelicolor A3(2)
Overexpression of antisense chromosomal cis-encoded noncoding RNAss (ncRNAs) in glutamine synthetase I resulted in a decrease in growth, protein synthesis, and antibiotic production in Streptomyces coelicolor. In addition, we predicted 3,597 cis-encoded ncRNAs and validated 13 of them experimentally, including several ncRNAs that are differentially expressed in bacterial hormone-defective mutants. Copyright ?? 2010, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.
-------------------------------------

10014387_234 - 0.841761413327 - science
[idi2, duplication, diphosphate, pattern, idi, isomerase]

Isopentenyl-diphosphate isomerases in human and mouse: Evolutionary analysis of a mammalian gene duplication
Isopentenyl diphosphate isomerase (IDI) activates isopentenyl diphosphate (IPP) for polymerization by converting it to its highly nucleophilic isomer dimethylallyl diphosphate (DMAPP). In plants, this central reaction of isoprenoid biosynthesis is catalyzed by various highly conserved isozymes that differ in expression pattern and subcellular localization. Here we report the identification of an IDI duplication in mammals. In contrast to the situation in plants, only one of the two isoforms (IDI1) is highly conserved, ubiquitously expressed and most likely responsible for housekeeping isomerase activity. The second isoform (IDI2) is much more divergent. We demonstrate that after the initial duplication IDI2 underwent a short phase of apparently random change, during which its active center became modified. Afterwards, IDI2 was exapted for a novel function and since then has been under strong purifying selection for at least 70 million years. Molecular modeling shows that the modified IDI2 is still likely to catalyze the isomerization of IPP to DMAPP. In humans, IDI2 is expressed at high levels only in skeletal muscle, where it may be involved in the specialized production of isoprenyl diphosphates for the posttranslational modification of proteins. The significant positive fitness effect of IDI2, revealed by the pattern of sequence conservation, as well as its specific expression pattern underscores the importance of the IDI gene duplication in mammals.
-------------------------------------

10008670_234 - 0.70262523316 - science
[times, measurement, vivo-like, effector, assay, condition, activity, enzymatic]

Why in vivo may not equal in vitro - new effectors revealed by measurement of enzymatic activities under the same in vivo-like assay conditions
Times Cited: 0
-------------------------------------

10017885_234 - 0.872065649804 - science
[cell, fascin, protrusion, actin, structure, role]

Fascins, and their roles in cell structure and function.
The fascins are a structurally unique and evolutionarily conserved group of actin cross-linking proteins. Fascins function in the organisation of two major forms of actin-based structures: dynamic, cortical cell protrusions and cytoplasmic microfilament bundles. The cortical structures, which include filopodia, spikes, lamellipodial ribs, oocyte microvilli and the dendrites of dendritic cells, have roles in cell-matrix adhesion, cell interactions and cell migration, whereas the cytoplasmic actin bundles appear to participate in cell architecture. We discuss the current understanding of the cellular mechanisms that regulate the binding of fascin to actin and how these processes contribute to the organisation or disassembly of cell protrusions. Although the in vivo roles of fascin have been studied principally in Drosophila, several human diseases are associated with inherited or acquired alterations in the expression of fascins. Strategies to modulate fascin-containing protrusions and thereby cell adhesive and migratory behaviour could have potential for therapeutic intervention in these conditions. The supplementary material referred to in this section can be found at http://www.interscience.wiley.com/jpages/0265-9247/suppmat/2002/v24.350.html
-------------------------------------

10004702_234 - 0.921391621727 - science
[plastid, erad, protein, cryptophyte, membrane, stramenopile, machinery, haptophyte, chromalveolate, selma]

ERAD components in organisms with complex red plastids suggest recruitment of a preexisting protein transport pathway for the periplastid membrane.
The plastids of cryptophytes, haptophytes, and heterokontophytes (stramenopiles) (together once known as chromists) are surrounded by four membranes, reflecting the origin of these plastids through secondary endosymbiosis. They share this trait with apicomplexans, which are alveolates, the plastids of which have been suggested to stem from the same secondary symbiotic event and therefore form a phylogenetic clade, the chromalveolates. The chromists are quantitatively the most important eukaryotic contributors to primary production in marine ecosystems. The mechanisms of protein import across their four plastid membranes are still poorly understood. Components of an endoplasmic reticulum-associated degradation (ERAD) machinery in cryptophytes, partially encoded by the reduced genome of the secondary symbiont (the nucleomorph), are implicated in protein transport across the second outermost plastid membrane. Here, we show that the haptophyte Emiliania huxleyi, like cryptophytes, stramenopiles, and apicomplexans, possesses a nuclear-encoded symbiont-specific ERAD machinery (SELMA, symbiont-specific ERAD-like machinery) in addition to the host ERAD system, with targeting signals that are able to direct green fluorescent protein or yellow fluorescent protein to the predicted cellular localization in transformed cells of the stramenopile Phaeodactylum tricornutum. Phylogenies of the duplicated ERAD factors reveal that all SELMA components trace back to a red algal origin. In contrast, the host copies of cryptophytes and haptophytes associate with the green lineage to the exclusion of stramenopiles and alveolates. Although all chromalveolates with four membrane-bound plastids possess the SELMA system, this has apparently not arisen in a single endosymbiotic event. Thus, our data do not support the chromalveolate hypothesis.
-------------------------------------

10010960_234 - 0.831672535559 - science
[ssc, caveolin, tissue, cav1, fibrosis, restoration, expression, pathogenesis, function, fibroblast]

Decreased expression of caveolin 1 in patients with systemic sclerosis: crucial role in the pathogenesis of tissue fibrosis.
OBJECTIVE: Recent studies have implicated caveolin 1 in the regulation of transforming growth factor beta (TGFbeta) downstream signaling. Given the crucial role of TGFbeta in the pathogenesis of systemic sclerosis (SSc), we sought to determine whether caveolin 1 is also involved in the pathogenesis of tissue fibrosis in SSc. We analyzed the expression of CAV1 in affected SSc tissues, studied the effects of lack of expression of CAV1 in vitro and in vivo, and analyzed the effects of restoration of caveolin 1 function on the fibrotic phenotype of SSc fibroblasts in vitro. METHODS: CAV1 expression in tissues was analyzed by immunofluorescence and confocal microscopy. The extent of tissue fibrosis in Cav1-knockout mice was assessed by histologic/histochemical analyses and quantified by hydroxyproline assays. Cav1-null and SSc fibroblast phenotypes and protein production were analyzed by real-time polymerase chain reaction, immunofluorescence, Western blot, and multiplexed enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay techniques. The effects of restoration of caveolin 1 function in SSc fibroblasts in vitro were also examined using a cell-permeable recombinant CAV1 peptide. RESULTS: CAV1 was markedly decreased in the affected lungs and skin of SSc patients. Cav1-knockout mice developed pulmonary and skin fibrosis. Down-regulation of caveolin 1 was maintained in cultured SSc fibroblasts, and restoration of caveolin 1 function in vitro normalized their phenotype and abrogated TGFbeta stimulation through inhibition of Smad3 activation. CONCLUSION: Caveolin 1 appears to participate in the pathogenesis of tissue fibrosis in SSc. Restoration of caveolin 1 function by treatment with a cell-permeable peptide corresponding to the CAV1 scaffolding domain may be a novel therapeutic approach in SSc.
-------------------------------------

10009980_234 - 0.76836228376 - science
[antigen, serum, infected]

Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay of antigens from Candida albicans circulating in infected mice and rabbits: the role of mannan.
Various antisera raised either to antigens of Candida albicans or to sub-lethal infections of blastospores (convalescent sera) were tested for their efficacy in diagnosing systemic disease in artifically infected animals. Globulin from convalescent serum, when conjugated with alkaline phosphatase and used in enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (ELISA), was the only antiserum type which detected circulating Candida-related antigen in the serum of infected animals. Conjugates made from anti-mannan, anti-blastospore or antimycelial globulin did not detect antigen. Mannan did not appear to be related to an antigen produced in sera of experimentally infected mice. The significance of these results in the diagnosis of systemic candidosis is discussed.
-------------------------------------

10010588_234 - 0.753197428601 - science
[pathway, design, tool, synthetic]

Computational tools for the synthetic design of biochemical pathways
As the field of synthetic biology is developing, the prospects for de novo design of biosynthetic pathways are becoming more and more realistic. Hence, there is an increasing need for computational tools that can support these efforts. A range of algorithms has been developed that can be used to identify all possible metabolic pathways and their corresponding enzymatic parts. These can then be ranked according to various properties and modelled in an organism-specific context. Finally, design software can aid the biologist in the integration of a selected pathway into smartly regulated transcriptional units. Here, we review key existing tools and offer suggestions for how informatics can help to shape the future of synthetic microbiology. ?? 2012 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved.
-------------------------------------

10009689_234 - 0.76835615473 - science
[survival, tumour, plexus, choroid, year, cpc, last, datum, radiotherapy, carcinoma]

Outcomes of choroid plexus tumours diagnosed in the North West region of the UK during 1954-2008
Background: Choroid plexus tumours (CPTs); namely choroid plexus papilloma (CPP) and choroid plexus carcinoma (CPC) are rare neoplasms of the central nervous system (CNS), accounting for 0.4-0.6% of all brain tumours and 1-4% of childhood brain tumours.  This study was undertaken to provide further insight into the epidemiology, natural history and outcomes in relation to changes in treatment emphasis for these rare tumours, over the last 56 years in the NW of England and determine the relative importance of possible contributory factors.Methods: Data relating to presentation, management and survival for 57 patients diagnosed with CPT between 1954-2008 was extracted from the North West Children’s Tumour Registry and hospital records.Results: Data collated showed a male predilection for choroid plexus carcinomas (22 male, 6 female) and an equal distribution of CPP and CPC (29 and 28 respectively). 5 year Kaplan-Meier estimates demonstrate significant improvements in survival for papillomas over the last 56 years with extent of resection being the most important factor in survival (p=0.001). Carcinomas show no significant improvement in survival over the last 56 years with 5 year survival fluctuating by 10% over the last 40 years.  However, overall survival is improved by adjuvant treatment with both chemotherapy and radiotherapy (p<0.05) with a non-significant trend for extent of resection leading to an improval in survival (p=0.08).  Radiotherapy remained the only significant factor in multivariable analysis (Cox p=0.031).Conclusion: Our study shows that CPC is more commonly diagnosed in males and that CPP and CPC arise in equal proportions.  OS for CPC has improved with the use of radiotherapy and chemotherapy. To the authors’ knowledge, this report characterises and provides survival data for choroid plexus tumours over a longer period of time than any other large single-institution series currently available.
-------------------------------------

10008601_234 - 0.91513759889 - science
[psoriasis, keratinocyte, laminin, membrane, expression, basement]

Concepts in psoriasis: psoriasis and the extracellular matrix.
Post-streptococcal guttate psoriasis only sometimes progresses to the persistent plaque psoriasis. We have previously proposed that psoriasis is driven by multiple extradomain A+ fibronectin (EDA+ FN) 'feedback loops'. The psoriasis-specific loop, the 'keratinocyte loop', depends upon expression by keratinocytes of α5β1 integrin. In normal skin, α5β1 expression is minimal or absent in resting epithelial cells, where basal cells are anchored to the laminin component of the basement membrane (via integrins α6β4 and α3β1). However, when the laminin layer is disrupted, due to wounding for instance, α5β1 is then strongly expressed by basal cells as a means for anchoring. At uninvolved skin sites in patients with psoriasis the laminin layer within the basement membrane is disrupted, with a consequential increase in the expression by basal keratinocytes of EDA+ FN and α5β1. We are postulating that in guttate psoriasis streptococcal lytic enzymes, and in particular streptokinase, may - via plasminogen activation - initiate a disruption of the laminin layer in the basement membrane. It is also possible that the expression by proliferating keratinocytes of plasminogen-activating factor might result in additional laminin digestion. The suggestion is that progression of guttate psoriasis to full-blown plaque psoriasis, or to its spontaneous resolution, is governed largely by the triggering of humoral immune responses. Thus, if streptococcal lytic enzymes are neutralized by host antibodies in advance of irreversible and lasting damage to the basement membrane of the dermal papillae, then guttate psoriasis will resolve spontaneously. In contrast, if permanent damage is induced prior to effective neutralization of the relevant bacterial toxins, then keratinocytes will become chronically destabilized. The consequence will be to liberate keratinocytes to proliferate in response to various stimuli, and to continue to elaborate plasminogen activation enzymes; the combined effect being, in concert with immunological priming, to precipitate and sustain plaque psoriasis.
-------------------------------------

10009839_234 - 0.926915439917 - science
[phagocytosis, non-opsonic, arthroconidium, neutrophil, mentagrophyte, level]

Non-opsonic phagocytosis of Trichophyton mentagrophytes arthroconidia by human neutrophils in vitro.
A non-opsonic mechanism of binding and phagocytosis by human neutrophils of Trichophyton mentagrophytes arthroconidia is described. This was in direct contrast to the complement dependency of Candida albicans phagocytosis. Both serum complement and specific antibody to T. mentagrophytes promoted maximal phagocytosis (61% and 40% of neutrophils, respectively, contained arthroconidia). Increasing the ratio of arthroconidia to neutrophils did not increase non-opsonic phagocytosis (18-26%). Phagocytosis of arthroconidia exposed to trypsin in the absence of opsonin was not affected (18%). However, proteinase and chitinase reduced the level of non-opsonic and opsonic phagocytosis to negligible levels (6.3% and 4.5%, respectively). When mannose was added to neutrophils, mannose receptors on the phagocyte membrane were partially blocked when arthroconidia were opsonised, but this did not reduce the level of non-opsonic phagocytosis. The non-opsonic mechanism proposed here may have direct relevance in skin sites poor in opsonins.
-------------------------------------

10018329_234 - 0.88760579334 - science
[eosinophilia, mouse, lung, cell, cd8]

Host genetic determinants of vaccine-induced eosinophilia during respiratory syncytial virus infection.
In BALB/c mice, sensitization with the attachment protein (G) of respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) leads to CD4+ T cell-mediated lung eosinophilia during subsequent challenge with RSV. To determine the host genetic influences on this model of lung eosinophilia, we tested 15 different inbred mouse strains. Eosinophilia developed in all H-2d (BALB/c, DBA/2n, and B10.D2), but not in H-2k (CBA/Ca, CBA/J, C3H, BALB.K, or B10.BR) mouse strains. Among H-2b mice, 129 and BALB.B developed eosinophilia, whereas C57BL/6 and C57BL/10 did not. Testing first generation crosses between sensitive and resistant strains showed that eosinophilia developed in all H-2dxk (n = 5), irrespective of background genes, but not in H-2dxb (n = 2) mice. In vivo depletion of CD8+ T cells or IFN-gamma rendered C57BL/6, but not BALB.K mice, susceptible to eosinophilia. Analysis of B10 recombinant mice showed that the Dd allele (in B10.A(5R) mice) prevented CD8+ T cell accumulation in the lung, resulting in intense lung eosinophilia. However, the Db allele (in B10.A(2R) and B10.A(4R) mice) supported CD8+ T cell expansion and prevented eosinophilia. Intracellular cytokine staining showed that lung eosinophilia correlated with reduced IFN-gamma and increased IL-10 expression in lung T cells. These results are compatible with the unifying model that Th2 cells mediate the disease but can be inhibited by CD8+ T cells secreting IFN-gamma. Our findings have important implications for the development of protective, nonpathogenic vaccines for RSV disease.
-------------------------------------

10003465_234 - 0.901287610761 - science
[gliotransmission, signalling, astrocyte, brain, exocytotic, astrocytic, secretory]

Astroglial excitability and gliotransmission: an appraisal of Ca2+ as a signalling route.
Astroglial cells, due to their passive electrical properties, were long considered subservient to neurons and to merely provide the framework and metabolic support of the brain. Although astrocytes do play such structural and housekeeping roles in the brain, these glial cells also contribute to the brain's computational power and behavioural output. These more active functions are endowed by the Ca(2+)-based excitability displayed by astrocytes. An increase in cytosolic Ca(2+) levels in astrocytes can lead to the release of signalling molecules, a process termed gliotransmission, via the process of regulated exocytosis. Dynamic components of astrocytic exocytosis include the vesicular-plasma membrane secretory machinery, as well as the vesicular traffic, which is governed not only by general cytoskeletal elements but also by astrocyte-specific IFs (intermediate filaments). Gliotransmitters released into the ECS (extracellular space) can exert their actions on neighbouring neurons, to modulate synaptic transmission and plasticity, and to affect behaviour by modulating the sleep homoeostat. Besides these novel physiological roles, astrocytic Ca(2+) dynamics, Ca(2+)-dependent gliotransmission and astrocyte-neuron signalling have been also implicated in brain disorders, such as epilepsy. The aim of this review is to highlight the newer findings concerning Ca(2+) signalling in astrocytes and exocytotic gliotransmission. For this we report on Ca(2+) sources and sinks that are necessary and sufficient for regulating the exocytotic release of gliotransmitters and discuss secretory machinery, secretory vesicles and vesicle mobility regulation. Finally, we consider the exocytotic gliotransmission in the modulation of synaptic transmission and plasticity, as well as the astrocytic contribution to sleep behaviour and epilepsy.
-------------------------------------

10010345_234 - 0.749784021322 - science
[mutagenesis, rational, random, engineering]

The future of industrial antibiotic production: from random mutagenesis to synthetic biology.
Natural products derived from the secondary metabolism of microbes constitute a cornerstone of modern medicine. Engineering bugs to produce these products in high quantities is a major challenge for biotechnology, which has usually been tackled by either one of two strategies: iterative random mutagenesis or rational design. Recently, we analyzed the transcriptome of a Streptomyces clavuligerus strain optimized for production of the ??-lactamase inhibitor clavulanic acid by multiple rounds of mutagenesis and selection, and discovered that the observed changes matched surprisingly well with simple changes that have been introduced into these strains by rational engineering. Here, we discuss how in the new field of synthetic biology, random mutagenesis and rational engineering can be implemented complementarily in ways which may enable one to go beyond the status quo that has now been reached by each method independently.
-------------------------------------

10010302_234 - 0.876744617613 - science
[antibiotic, metabolite, signalling, biosynthesis, time, mutant, scba, ??, molecule, scb]

Deletion of the signalling molecule synthase ScbA has pleiotropic effects on secondary metabolite biosynthesis, morphological differentiation and primary metabolism in Streptomyces coelicolor A3(2)
Streptomycetes have high biotechnological relevance as producers of diverse metabolites widely used in medical and agricultural applications. The biosynthesis of these metabolites is controlled by signalling molecules, ??-butyrolactones, that act as bacterial hormones. In Streptomyces coelicolor, a group of signalling molecules called SCBs (S. coelicolorbutanolides) regulates production of the pigmented antibiotics coelicolor polyketide (CPK), actinorhodin and undecylprodigiosin. The ??-butyrolactone synthase ScbA is responsible for the biosynthesis of SCBs. Here we show the results of a genome-wide transcriptome analysis of a scbA deletion mutant prior to and during the transition to antibiotic production. We report a strong perturbation in the expression of three pigmented antibiotic clusters in the mutant throughout the growth curve, thus providing a molecular explanation for the antibiotic phenotype observed previously. Our study also revealed, for the first time, that the secondary metabolite cluster responsible for synthesis of the siderophore desferrioxamine is under the control of SCB signalling. Moreover, expression of the genes encoding enzymes for primary metabolism pathways, which supply antibiotic precursors and genes for morphological differentiation, was found shifted earlier in time in the mutant. In conclusion, our time series analysis demonstrates new details of the regulatory effects of the ??-butyrolactone system in Streptomyces. ?? 2010 The Authors. Journal compilation ?? 2010 Society for Applied Microbiology and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
-------------------------------------

10003286_234 - 0.881475098535 - science
[galanin, hf, hair, human, growth]

The neuropeptide galanin is a novel inhibitor of human hair growth.
BACKGROUND: Galanin is a trophic factor of the central and peripheral nervous system that shows widespread distribution in human skin. However, the exact localization and the role of galanin in the hair follicle (HF) remain to be clarified. OBJECTIVES: To characterize galanin expression in human scalp HFs and to examine the effects of galanin on normal human scalp HF growth in organ culture. METHODS: Immunohistochemistry was performed on cryosections of human female scalp skin. Anagen HFs were microdissected and cultured up to 9 days and treated with 100 nmol L(-1) galanin. Staining for Ki-67, TUNEL and Masson-Fontana were used to analyse proliferation, apoptosis and hair cycle staging of the HFs. Functional effects of galanin were tested in serum-free HF organ culture. RESULTS: Galanin-like immunoreactivity was detected in the outer root sheath (ORS) and inner root sheath. Additionally, galanin mRNA was detected in ORS keratinocytes and all HF samples tested. Galanin receptor transcripts (GalR2, GalR3) were also detected in selected samples. Galanin reduced proliferation of hair matrix keratinocytes in situ compared with vehicle-treated controls, shortened the hair growth phase (anagen) in vitro and reduced hair shaft elongation. This was accompanied by the premature development of a catagen-like morphology of galanin-treated HFs. CONCLUSIONS: We present the first evidence that human HFs are both a source and a functionally relevant target of galanin. Due to its hair growth-inhibitory properties in vitro, galanin application deserves further exploration as a potential new treatment strategy for unwanted hair growth (hirsutism, hypertrichosis).
-------------------------------------

10003571_234 - 0.93081077286 - science
[sf1293, type, prokaryote, glutamine, synthetase, bialapho]

Purification and properties of a prokaryote type glutamine synthetase from the bialaphos producer Streptomyces hygroscopicus SF1293
A prokaryote type glutamine synthetase (GS) was purified from a bialaphos (BA)-producing organism, Streptomyces hygroscopicus SF1293 (SF1293). The GS (GS I) consisted of a 55,000 dalton subunit, and its N-terminal amino acid sequence was similar to that of S. coelicolor GS. GS I was highly sensitive to GS inhibitor phosphinothricin (PPT). An increase of GS activity was observed accompanied by BA accumulation.
-------------------------------------

10017160_234 - 0.819538759841 - science
[formaldehyde, pathway, transcription, factor, frmr, structure, protein]

Molecular Basis of Bacterial Formaldehyde Sensing
Formaldehyde is a highly toxic molecule; despite this, it is produced in the cells of all living organisms as a by-product of metabolic pathways. Consequently, several pathways have evolved throughout life in order to detoxify cellular formaldehyde. These pathways need to be regulated within the cell and this study sets out to determine how these pathways are regulated in particular bacteria. Several approaches are taken to achieve this. Known or predicted transcription factors that regulate formaldehyde detoxification pathways from particular organisms are considered. These proteins are called FrmR (E. coli), HxlR1 (Bacillus subtilis), and HxlR2 (Bacillus Cereus). The transcription factors are cloned and purified using molecular biology techniques. The proteins are subject to biophysical characterisation i.e. size and secondary structure composition. Additionally, the X-ray crystal structure of HxlR2 is determined and significant progress is made towards determining the structure of FrmR. Interactions of these transcription factors towards their target DNA sequences are studied along with the effect that formaldehyde has on these interactions. A reporter system is constructed that enables the behaviour of FrmR to be studied in vivo. Residues that are likely to play important roles in DNA recognition by this regulator are identified. Additionally, this reporter system identifies a residue that is essential for formaldehyde sensing by this protein. Overall, some significant insights into how these transcription factors carry out their biological function are established.
-------------------------------------

10005496_234 - 0.856163644083 - science
[measurement, reactivity, effect, study]

Reactivity of measurement in health psychology: how much of a problem is it? What can be done about it?
PURPOSE: Measurement reactivity is defined as being present where measurement results in changes in the people being measured. The main aim of this review is to provide an overview of the current state of knowledge concerning the extent and nature of psychological measurement affecting people who complete the measures. Other aims are to describe how this may affect conclusions drawn in health psychology research and to outline where more research is needed. METHODS: Narrative review. RESULTS: Several studies, using a variety of methods, have found measurement procedures to alter subsequent cognition, emotion, and behaviour. In many instances, the effects obtained were of up to medium size. However, the extent to which such studies are representative is not clear: do other studies which find no reactive effects of measurement not exist or do they exist but are not reported? CONCLUSIONS: Although measurement reactivity can yield medium-sized effects, our understanding of this phenomenon is still rudimentary. We do not know the precise circumstances that are likely to result in measurement reactivity: we cannot predict when problems are more likely to arise. There is a particular absence of studies of the mechanisms by which measurement reactivity arises. There is a need for a systematic review of this literature, which should aim to quantify the extent of measurement reactivity effects and to provide a firmer evidence base for theorizing about the sources of reactivity.
-------------------------------------

10016419_234 - 0.866541892679 - science
[gene, hsd17b1, species, human]

Interspecies comparison of gene structure and computational analysis of gene regulation of 17beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 1
{17beta-Hydroxysteroid} dehydrogenase type 1 {(HSD17B1)} is a key enzyme of 17beta-estradiol biosynthesis, and in rodents is additionally involved in testosterone biosynthesis. The human {HSD17B1} gene, located on chromosome 17q12-21, is duplicated in tandem, with the 3???-copy being the functional gene. Here we show by sequencing the gene from a diverse set of related species that this duplication is of very recent evolutionary origin, having occurred in the common ancestor of Hominoidae (apes and humans) while being absent in the closely related Old World monkeys {(Macaca)} and the outgroup species Tupaia belangeri and Mus musculus. By computational analysis of the conserved regulatory elements in the 5???-untranslated {(5???-UTR)} and putative promoter region of the {HSD17B1} gene and, where present, pseudogene, across our broad sample of species we can show significant differences that might point to the origin of the divergent substrate specificity of human and rodent {HSD17B1} and highlight potential functionally relevant differences in regulatory patterns in different evolutionary lineages. ?? 2005 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.
-------------------------------------

10008492_234 - 0.732624595518 - science
[adenoma, igf-ii, colorectal, serum, individual, igfbp-2, factor]

Circulating insulin-like growth factor II and colorectal adenomas
Circulating insulin-like growth factor I (IGF-I) and IGF-binding protein-3 (IGFBP-3) may be risk factors for the development of colorectal cancer. On the other hand, IGF-II and IGFBP-2 are overexpressed in colorectal carcinomas. These contrasting backgrounds led us to investigate the relationship between serum IGF-I, IGF-II, IGFBP-2, and IGFBP-3 and the presence of colorectal adenomas, known precursors of colorectal carcinoma, in 345 volunteers attending a screening flexible sigmoidoscopy trial (entry criteria: healthy, aged 55-64 yr). The most striking finding was an elevated mean serum IGF-II in individuals with adenomas (n = 52) compared with controls (mean difference, 139 ng/mL; 95% confidence intervals, 82, 196; P &lt; 0.0001). Logistic regression adjusting for confounding factors confirmed the significant association between IGF-II and adenoma occurrence (P &lt; 0.0001) and revealed an additional positive association with serum IGFBP-2 (P &lt; 0.0001). However, there was no association found between either serum IGF-I and/or IGFBP-3 and the presence of adenomas. Additionally, in 31 individuals with adenomas in whom levels were determined pre- and postpolypectomy, there was a significant fall in mean IGF-II (P &lt; 0.001) and IGFBP-2 (P &lt; 0.001) after adenoma removal, but no difference in IGF-II and IGFBP-2 concentrations between repeated samples in 20 individuals without adenomas. Immunohistochemical studies demonstrated IGF-II expression in 83% of all adenomas, which contrasted with absent expression in normal colonic expression and hyperplastic polyps. This study has shown for the first time that serum IGF-II may be a tumor marker in individuals with colorectal adenomas. Further studies are needed to validate these relationships in larger populations, including individuals undergoing colonoscopy.
-------------------------------------

10011648_234 - 0.756276673727 - science
[strain, gene, change, clavulanic, acid]

Genome-wide gene expression changes in an industrial clavulanic acid overproduction strain of Streptomyces clavuligerus
To increase production of the important pharmaceutical compound clavulanic acid, a ??-lactamase inhibitor, both random mutagenesis approaches and rational engineering of Streptomyces clavuligerus strains have been extensively applied. Here, for the first time, we compared genome-wide gene expression of an industrial S. clavuligerus strain, obtained through iterative mutagenesis, with that of the wild-type strain. Intriguingly, we found that the majority of the changes contributed not to a complex rewiring of primary metabolism but consisted of a simple upregulation of various antibiotic biosynthesis gene clusters. A few additional transcriptional changes in primary metabolism at key points seem to divert metabolic fluxes to the biosynthetic precursors for clavulanic acid. In general, the observed changes largely coincide with genes that have been targeted by rational engineering in recent years, yet the presence of a number of previously unexplored genes clearly demonstrates that functional genomic analysis can provide new leads for strain improvement in biotechnology. ?? 2010 The Authors. Journal compilation ?? 2010 Society for Applied Microbiology and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
-------------------------------------

10005096_234 - 0.942082223884 - science
[ganglion, basal, trade-off, dopamine, exploration-exploitation, action, model]

Dopaminergic Control of the Exploration-Exploitation Trade-Off via the Basal Ganglia.
We continuously face the dilemma of choosing between actions that gather new information or actions that exploit existing knowledge. This "exploration-exploitation" trade-off depends on the environment: stability favors exploiting knowledge to maximize gains; volatility favors exploring new options and discovering new outcomes. Here we set out to reconcile recent evidence for dopamine's involvement in the exploration-exploitation trade-off with the existing evidence for basal ganglia control of action selection, by testing the hypothesis that tonic dopamine in the striatum, the basal ganglia's input nucleus, sets the current exploration-exploitation trade-off. We first advance the idea of interpreting the basal ganglia output as a probability distribution function for action selection. Using computational models of the full basal ganglia circuit, we showed that, under this interpretation, the actions of dopamine within the striatum change the basal ganglia's output to favor the level of exploration or exploitation encoded in the probability distribution. We also found that our models predict striatal dopamine controls the exploration-exploitation trade-off if we instead read-out the probability distribution from the target nuclei of the basal ganglia, where their inhibitory input shapes the cortical input to these nuclei. Finally, by integrating the basal ganglia within a reinforcement learning model, we showed how dopamine's effect on the exploration-exploitation trade-off could be measurable in a forced two-choice task. These simulations also showed how tonic dopamine can appear to affect learning while only directly altering the trade-off. Thus, our models support the hypothesis that changes in tonic dopamine within the striatum can alter the exploration-exploitation trade-off by modulating the output of the basal ganglia.
-------------------------------------

10008612_234 - 0.803220568248 - science
[ige, protein, response, lactoferrin, igg, novel, form, glycosylation, recombinant, molecule]

Influence of protein expression system on elicitation of IgE antibody responses: experience with lactoferrin.
With increased interest in genetically modified (GM) crop plants there is an important need to understand the properties that contribute to the ability of such novel proteins to provoke immune and/or allergic responses. One characteristic that may be relevant is glycosylation, particularly as novel expression systems (e.g. bacterial to plant) will impact on the protein glycoprofile. The allergenicity (IgE inducing) and immunogenicity (IgG inducing) properties of wild type native human lactoferrin (NLF) from human milk (hm) and neutrophil granules (n) and a recombinant molecule produced in rice (RLF) have been assessed. These forms of lactoferrin have identical amino acid sequences, but different glycosylation patterns: hmNLF and nNLF have complex glycoprofiles including Lewis (Le)(x) structures, with particularly high levels of Le(x) expressed by nNLF, whereas RLF is simpler and rich in mannose residues. Antibody responses induced in BALB/c strain mice by intraperitoneal exposure to the different forms of lactoferrin were characterised. Immunisation with both forms of NLF stimulated substantial IgG and IgE antibody responses. In contrast, the recombinant molecule was considerably less immunogenic and failed to stimulate detectable IgE, irrespective of endotoxin and iron content. The glycans did not contribute to epitope formation, with equivalent IgE and IgG binding recorded for high titre anti-NLF antisera regardless of whether the immunising NLF or the recombinant molecule were used substrates in the analyses. These data demonstrate that differential glycosylation profiles can have a profound impact on protein allergenicity and immunogenicity, with mannose and Le(x) exhibiting opposing effects. These results have clear relevance for characterising the allergenic hazards of novel proteins in GM crops.
-------------------------------------

10011740_234 - 0.903501756338 - science
[oxide, stress, alloy, corrosion, tetragonal, phase, monoclinic, zirconium, transformation, transition]

Residual Stress and Phase Characterisation on Zirconium Oxides using Synchrotron X-ray Diffraction A
The present work was produced as part of the MUZIC consortium, a collaboration between a multi-university team from the UK and industrial partners working on the field of nuclear energy, fabrication of alloys and nuclear research. The aim of the project is to establish a multidiscipline mechanistic understanding of the corrosion and breakaway processes of zirconium alloys used as fuel cladding materials in the nuclear industry. A better understanding of the corrosion mechanism of zirconium alloys will not only aid the development of better performing alloys, but will also allow more accurate models to be developed to reliably predict the service life of existing alloys. This could lead to higher burn-up, increase of energy production and reduction of nuclear waste produced.This work seeks to provide a better understanding of the role of residual stresses in the oxide, which are produced during oxidation due to high Pilling-Bedworth ratio and their impact on oxide phase transformation and oxidation kinetics by employing high energy synchrotron X-ray diffraction techniques. This is achieved by observing how stresses change as oxide growth approaches and passes through transition of the corrosion kinetics, their evolution across the oxide thickness, in situ characterising stresses and phase growth early in oxidation process and how stress changes can affect corrosion properties.It was found that relatively high compressive stresses in the two oxide crystal structures are present. The stresses relax with time up to moments before transition where a possible threshold stress magnitude is reached to aid an extensive tetragonal to monoclinic phase transformation. This generalised tetragonal to monoclinic transformation is believed to produce highly stressed monoclinic crystal structure grains and cause defects in the oxide. The above observation is further supported by a decrease of the tetragonal zirconia content. This is the moment that the oxide looses its protective character and a transition of the corrosion kinetics occurs. By comparing different materials it was observed that the minimum magnitude of the tetragonal phase is lower in better performing alloys while the tetragonal content is some cases was relatively low. It is suggested that the amount of the tetragonal phase, in the oxide layer, is not as important as the rate of it transforming into monoclinic. The extent of tetragonal to monoclinic transformation, that introduces defects in the oxide, defines how protective an oxide layer is.The present work provides a contribution to the available knowledge of the importance of residual stresses in the oxide layer and metal substrate of zirconium alloys and how they can affect corrosion rates or act as a precursor to the corrosion transition.
-------------------------------------

10010994_234 - 0.70252329156 - science
[growth, oxide, oxygen]

Anodic growth of titanium oxide: Electrochemical behaviour and morphological evolution
The mechanism of growth of anodic titanium oxide in sulphuric acid has been investigated by potentiostatic and potentiodynamic anodizing, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy and transmission electron microscopy. It was found that most of the charge passed during growth is consumed in oxygen evolution at the oxide-solution interface and the measured current relates to the electronic conduction properties of the oxide. Further, it was confirmed that an amorphous to crystalline transition takes place during potentiodynamic growth, and the transition triggers the additional generation of oxygen bubbles that occurs within the oxide. Depending on the growth conditions, the oxygen bubbles can rupture with local re-growth of the film then occurring. ?? 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
-------------------------------------

10011805_234 - 0.856535440338 - science
[times, primates, anatomy, forelimb, cited, vein, comparative]

THE COMPARATIVE ANATOMY OF THE FORELIMB VEINS OF PRIMATES
Times Cited: 1
-------------------------------------

10003769_234 - 0.891275998823 - science
[convexity, experiment, symmetry, shape, contour, concavity, detection, advantage, task, visual]

The role of convexity in perception of symmetry and in visual short-term memory
Visual perception of shape is affected by coding of local convexities and concavities. For instance, a recent study reported that deviations from symmetry carried by convexities were easier to detect than deviations carried by concavities. We removed some confounds and extended this work from a detection of reflection of a contour (i.e., bilateral symmetry), to a detection of repetition of a contour (i.e.,
translational symmetry). We tested whether any convexity advantage is specific to bilateral symmetry in a two-interval (Experiment 1) and a single-interval (Experiment 2) detection task. In both, we found a convexity advantage only for repetition. When we removed the need to choose which region of the contour to monitor (Experiment 3) the effect disappeared. In a second series of studies, we again used shapes with multiple convex or concave features. Participants performed a change detection task in which only one of the features could change. We did not find any evidence that convexities are special in visual short-term memory, when the to-be-remembered features only changed shape (Experiment 4), when they changed shape and changed from concave to convex and vice versa (Experiment 5), or when these conditions were mixed (Experiment 6). We did find a small advantage for coding convexity as well as concavity over an isolated (and thus ambiguous) contour. The latter is consistent with the known effect of closure on processing of shape. We conclude that convexity plays a role in many perceptual tasks but that it does not have a basic encoding advantage over concavity.
-------------------------------------

10003971_234 - 0.813891876749 - science
[cited, chelate, times, boron, cations, restrained, vol, intermolecular, borylation, electrophilic]

Chelate Restrained Boron Cations for Intermolecular Electrophilic Arene Borylation (vol 29, pg 241, 2010)
Times Cited: 0
-------------------------------------

10009703_234 - 0.823636288152 - science
[adverse, reaction, nanomedicine, factor]

Genomic perspectives in inter-individual adverse responses following nanomedicine administration: The way forward.
The underlying mechanism of intravenous infusion-related adverse reactions inherent to regulatory-approved nanomedicines still remains elusive. There are substantial inter-individual differences in observed adverse reactions, which may include cardiovascular, broncho-pulmonary, muco-cutaneous, neuro-psychosomatic and autonomic manifestations. Although nanomedicine-mediated triggering of complement activation has been suggested to be a significant contributing factor to these adverse events, complement activation may still proceed in non-responders. Whether these reactions share similar immunological mechanisms and underpinning genetic factors with drug hypersensitivity syndrome remains to be investigated. Genetic association studies could be a powerful tool to dissect causative factors and reveal the multiple molecular pathways that induce infusion related adverse reactions. It is envisaged that such research may lead to the design of reliable in vitro profiling tests for risk assessment and treatment decisions, thereby revolutionizing the practice of medicine with nanopharmaceuticals. Such procedures may further improve regulatory approval processes for nanomedicines currently in the pipeline and decrease the overall cost of health care. Here we discuss some key innate immunity genes and their polymorphisms in relation to nanomedicine infusion-mediated symptomatic responses.
-------------------------------------

10009967_234 - 0.780246545476 - science
[strain, germ, tube, serum, concentration, elongation, antifungal, inhibition]

Effect of imidazole antifungals on the development of germ tubes by strains of Candida albicans.
Three imidazole antifungals (ketoconazole, tioconazole and miconazole) were examined for their effect on germ tube development by synchronous blastospore populations and on actively growing germ tubes of three strains of Candida albicans. After incubation in serum for 4 h the largest differences in germ tube elongation between strains were detected at concentrations (0.005 mg/l) where minimal inhibition was observed. Germ tube elongation in antifungal-containing serum diminished with increasing concentration. Maximum inhibition occurred at concentrations of 0.5 mg/l. All three antifungals inhibited the rate of hyphal elongation by the strains over a 6 h period at this concentration. Tests where germinated blastospores of strain 3281 were transferred to serum containing 0.5 mg/l of antifungal indicated that all three drugs inhibited further elongation. However, the rate of inhibition was dependent upon the length of time germination had proceeded in serum alone prior to transfer to antifungal-containing serum.
-------------------------------------

10003626_234 - 0.757699508955 - science
[cancer, biomarker, beginning, sample, page, detection, colleague, early, ovarian]

The sine qua non of discovering novel biomarkers for early detection of ovarian cancer: carefully selected preclinical samples.
This perspective discusses reports by Cramer and colleagues (beginning on page 365 in this issue of the journal) and Zhu and colleagues (beginning on page 375), which provide the first systematic and reliable comparison of a large number of candidate biomarkers for the early detection of ovarian cancer in a sample set well-suited for this purpose. This research has important implications for the future design of cancer biomarker studies.
-------------------------------------

10016815_234 - 0.754649881729 - science
[protein, function, classifier]

Predicting protein function by machine learning on amino acid sequences - A critical evaluation
Background: Predicting the function of newly discovered proteins by simply inspecting their amino acid sequence is one of the major challenges of post-genomic computational biology, especially when done without recourse to experimentation or homology information. Machine learning classifiers are able to discriminate between proteins belonging to different functional classes. Until now, however, it has been unclear if this ability would be transferable to proteins of unknown function, which may show distinct biases compared to experimentally more tractable proteins. Results: Here we show that proteins with known and unknown function do indeed differ significantly. We then show that proteins from different bacterial species also differ to an even larger and very surprising extent, but that functional classifiers nonetheless generalize successfully across species boundaries. We also show that in the case of highly specialized proteomes classifiers from a different, but more conventional, species may in fact outperform the endogenous species-specific classifier. Conclusion: We conclude that there is very good prospect of successfully predicting the function of yet uncharacterized proteins using machine learning classifiers trained on proteins of known function. ?? 2007 Al-Shahib et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd.
-------------------------------------

10007013_234 - 0.881354892397 - science
[particle, plume, similar, excess, aerosol, emission, oa, factor, co2, concentration]

Evolution of trace gases and particles emitted by a chaparral fire in California
Biomass burning (BB) is a major global source of trace gases and particles. Accurately representing the production and evolution of these emissions is an important goal for atmospheric chemical transport models. We measured a suite of gases and aerosols emitted from an 81 hectare prescribed fire in chaparral fuels on the central coast of California, US on 17 November 2009. We also measured physical and chemical changes that occurred in the isolated down-wind plume in the first similar to 4 h after emission. The measurements were carried out onboard a Twin Otter aircraft outfitted with an airborne Fourier transform infrared spectrometer (AFTIR), aerosol mass spectrometer (AMS), single particle soot photometer (SP2), nephelometer, LiCor CO2 analyzer, a chemiluminescence ozone instrument, and a wing-mounted meteorological probe. Our measurements included: CO2; CO; NOx; NH3; non-methane organic compounds; organic aerosol (OA); inorganic aerosol (nitrate, ammonium, sulfate, and chloride); aerosol light scattering; refractory black carbon (rBC); and ambient temperature, relative humidity, barometric pressure, and three-dimensional wind velocity. The molar ratio of excess O-3 to excess CO in the plume (Delta O-3/Delta CO) increased from -5.13 (+/- 1.13) x 10(-3) to 10.2 (+/- 2.16) x 10(-2) in similar to 4.5 h following smoke emission. Excess acetic and formic acid (normalized to excess CO) increased by factors of 1.73 +/- 0.43 and 7.34 +/- 3.03 (respectively) over the same time since emission. Based on the rapid decay of C2H4 we infer an in-plume average OH concentration of 5.27 (+/- 0.97) x 10(6) molec cm(-3), consistent with previous studies showing elevated OH concentrations in biomass burning plumes. Ammonium, nitrate, and sulfate all increased over the course of 4 h. The observed ammonium increase was a factor of 3.90 +/- 2.93 in about 4 h, but accounted for just similar to 36\% of the gaseous ammonia lost on a molar basis. Some of the gas phase NH3 loss may have been due to condensation on, or formation of, particles below the AMS detection range. NOx was converted to PAN and particle nitrate with PAN production being about two times greater than production of observable nitrate in the first similar to 4 h following emission. The excess aerosol light scattering in the plume (normalized to excess CO2) increased by a factor of 2.50 +/- 0.74 over 4 h. The increase in light scattering was similar to that observed in an earlier study of a biomass burning plume in Mexico where significant secondary formation of OA closely tracked the increase in scattering. In the California plume, however, Delta OA/Delta CO2 decreased sharply for the first hour and then increased slowly with a net decrease of similar to 20\% over 4 h. The fraction of thickly coated rBC particles increased up to similar to 85\% over the 4 h aging period. Decreasing OA accompanied by increased scattering/particle coating in initial aging may be due to a combination of particle coagulation and evaporation processes. Recondensation of species initially evaporated from the particles may have contributed to the subsequent slow rise in OA. We compare our results to observations from other plume aging studies and suggest that differences in environmental factors such as smoke concentration, oxidant concentration, actinic flux, and RH contribute significantly to the variation in plume evolution observations.
-------------------------------------

10018389_234 - 0.824915934774 - science
[mutant, cax, seed, metal, germination, role, stress, double, knockout, arabidopsis]

Knockout of multiple Arabidopsis cation/H(+) exchangers suggests isoform-specific roles in metal stress response, germination and seed mineral nutrition.
Cation/H(+) exchangers encoded by CAX genes play an important role in the vacuolar accumulation of metals including Ca(2+) and Mn(2+). Arabidopsis thaliana CAX1 and CAX3 have been previously shown to differ phylogenetically from CAX2 but the physiological roles of these different transporters are still unclear. To examine the functions and the potential of redundancy between these three cation transporters, cax1/cax2 and cax2/cax3 double knockout mutants were generated and compared with wild type and cax single knockouts. These double mutants had equivalent metal stress responses to single cax mutants. Both cax1 and cax1/cax2 had increased tolerance to Mg stress, while cax2 and cax2/cax3 both had increased sensitivity to Mn stress. The cax1/cax2 and cax2/cax3 mutants did not exhibit the deleterious developmental phenotypes previously seen with the cax1/cax3 mutant. However, these new double mutants did show alterations in seed germination, specifically a delay in germination time. These alterations correlated with changes in nutrient content within the seeds of the mutants, particularly the cax1/cax2 mutant which had significantly higher seed content of Ca and Mn. This study indicates that the presence of these Arabidopsis CAX transporters is important for normal germination and infers a role for CAX proteins in metal homeostasis within the seed.
-------------------------------------

10005587_234 - 0.903273943297 - science
[nicardipine, acid, basal]

Effect of nicardipine on gastric acid secretion in man.
The effect of nicardipine on basal and pentagastrin-stimulated gastric acid secretion in normal volunteers was investigated. When compared with saline, an intravenous infusion of nicardipine caused a significant decrease in peak acid output (from 37.8 mmol hour-1 to 28.8 mmol hour-1; P = 0.04) and a small reduction in aspirate volume. Nicardipine had no significant action on basal acid output or volume of aspirate. Proteolytic activity in both the basal and stimulated periods was unaffected by nicardipine as were serum gastrin concentrations. Although calcium channel blocking agents are theoretically antisecretory the present study suggests they are unlikely to have clinically useful therapeutic actions.
-------------------------------------

10007447_234 - 0.821335120954 - science
[erk5, cell, protein, kinase]

The extracellular-regulated protein kinase 5 (ERK5) promotes cell proliferation through the down-regulation of inhibitors of cyclin dependent protein kinases (CDKs).
Activation of the extracellular-regulated protein kinase 5 (ERK5) has been associated with mitogenic signal transduction. However, conflicting findings have challenged the idea that ERK5 is a critical regulator of cell proliferation. We have addressed this issue by testing the effect of the conditional loss of ERK5 in primary fibroblasts. We have discovered that ERK5 suppressed the expression of the cyclin dependent protein kinase (CDKs) inhibitors, p21 and p27, by decreasing mRNA and protein stability, respectively. As a result, low level CDK2 activity detected in ERK5-deficient cells correlated with a defect in G1 to S phase transition of the cell cycle. Similarly, we found that the malignant MDA-MB-231 human breast cancer cell line was dependent on ERK5 to proliferate. We propose that ERK5 blocks p21 expression in MDA-MB-231 cells via a mechanism that implicates c-Myc-dependent transcriptional regulation of the miR-17-92 cluster. Together with evidence that cancer patients with poor prognosis display a high level of expression of components of the ERK5 signaling pathway, these findings support the hypothesis that ERK5 can be a potential target for cancer therapy.
-------------------------------------

10018148_234 - 0.923201516806 - science
[aptamer, heparanase, enzyme, tumour, assay, cell, hpse1]

Development of novel single-stranded nucleic acid aptamers against the pro-angiogenic and metastatic enzyme heparanase (HPSE1).
Heparanase is an enzyme involved in extracellular matrix remodelling and heparan sulphate proteoglycan catabolism. It is secreted by metastatic tumour cells, allowing them to penetrate the endothelial cell layer and basement membrane to invade target organs. The release of growth factors at the site of cleaved heparan sulphate chains further enhance the potential of the tumour by encouraging the process of angiogenesis. This leads to increased survival and further proliferation of the tumour. Aptamers are single or double stranded oligonucleotides that recognise specific small molecules, peptides, proteins, or even cells or tissues and have shown great potential over the years as diagnostic and therapeutic agents in anticancer treatment. For the first time, single stranded DNA aptamers were successfully generated against the active heterodimer form of heparanase using a modified SELEX protocol, and eluted based on increasing affinity for the target. Sandwich ELISA assays showed recognition of heparanase by the aptamers at a site distinct from that of a polyclonal HPSE1 antibody. The binding affinities of aptamer to immobilised enzyme were high (7 × 10(7) to 8 × 10(7) M(-1)) as measured by fluorescence spectroscopy. Immunohistochemistry and immunofluorescence studies demonstrated that the aptamers were able to recognise heparanase with staining comparable or in some cases superior to that of the HPSE1 antibody control. Finally, matrigel assay demonstrated that aptamers were able to inhibit heparanase. This study provides clear proof of principle concept that nucleic acid aptamers can be generated against heparanase. These reagents may serve as useful tools to explore the functional role of the enzyme and in the future development of diagnostic assays or therapeutic reagents.
-------------------------------------

10003293_234 - 0.901330920584 - science
[human, receptor, aea, cannabinoid, endocannabinoid, kc]

Endocannabinoids modulate human epidermal keratinocyte proliferation and survival via the sequential engagement of cannabinoid receptor-1 and transient receptor potential vanilloid-1.
We have recently shown that lipid mediators of the emerging endocannabinoid system (ECS) are key players of growth control of the human pilosebaceous unit. In this study, we asked whether the prototypic endocannabinoid anandamide (N-arachidonoylethanolamine, AEA) has a role in growth and survival of epidermal keratinocytes (KCs). Using human cultured KCs and skin organ-culture models, and by employing combined pharmacological and molecular approaches, we provide early evidence that AEA markedly suppresses KC proliferation and induces cell death, both in vitro and in situ. Moreover, we present that these cellular actions are mediated by a most probably constitutively active signaling mechanism that involves the activation of the metabotropic cannabinoid receptor CB(1) and a sequential engagement of the "ionotropic cannabinoid receptor" transient receptor potential vanilloid-1 (TRPV1). Finally, we demonstrate that the cellular effects of AEA are most probably due to a Ca(2+) influx via the non-selective, highly Ca(2+)-permeable ion channel TRPV1, and the concomitant elevation of intracellular Ca(2+) concentration. The data reported here may encourage one to explore whether the targeted manipulation of the above signaling pathway of the cutaneous ECS could become a useful adjunct treatment strategy for hyperproliferative human dermatoses such as psoriasis or KC-derived skin tumors.
-------------------------------------

10016369_234 - 0.892947954289 - science
[protein, monoubiquitination, ubiquitinated, ubiquitin-binding, target]

Regulation of ubiquitin-binding proteins by monoubiquitination
Proteins containing ubiquitin-binding domains (UBDs) interact with ubiquitinated targets and regulate diverse biological processes, including endocytosis, signal transduction, transcription and DNA repair. Many of the UBD-containing proteins are also themselves monoubiquitinated, but the functional role and the mechanisms that underlie this modification are less well understood. Here, we demonstrate that monoubiquitination of the endocytic proteins Sts1, Sts2, Eps15 and Hrs results in intramolecular interactions between ubiquitin and their UBDs, thereby preventing them from binding in trans to ubiquitinated targets. Permanent monoubiquitination of these proteins, mimicked by the fusion of ubiquitin to their carboxyl termini, impairs their ability to regulate trafficking of ubiquitinated receptors. Moreover, we mapped the in vivo monoubiquitination site in Sts2 and demonstrated that its mutation enhances the Sts2-mediated effects of epidermal-growth-factor-receptor downregulation. We propose that monoubiquitination of ubiquitin-binding proteins inhibits their capacity to bind to and control the functions of ubiquitinated targets in vivo. ?? 2006 Nature Publishing Group.
-------------------------------------

10009346_234 - 0.810505738308 - science
[red, fluorescent, protein]

Monomeric red fluorescent proteins with a large Stokes shift
Two-photon microscopy has advanced fluorescence imaging ofcellular processes in living animals. Fluorescent proteins in theblue-green wavelength range are widely used in two-photonmicroscopy; however, the use of red fluorescent proteins is limitedby the low power output of Ti-Sapphire lasers above 1,000 nm. Toovercome this limitation we have developed two red fluorescentproteins, LSS-mKate1 and LSS-mKate2, which possess large Stokesshifts with excitation/emission maxima at 463∕624 and 460∕605nm, respectively. These LSS-mKates are characterized by high pHstability, photostability, rapid chromophore maturation, and monomericbehavior. They lack absorbance in the green region, providingan additional red color to the commonly used red fluorescentproteins. Substantial overlap between the two-photon excitationspectra of the LSS-mKates and blue-green fluorophores enablesmulticolor imaging using a single laser. We applied this approachto a mouse xenograft model of breast cancer to intravitally studythe motility and Golgi-nucleus alignment of tumor cells as a functionof their distance from blood vessels. Our data indicate thatwithin 40 μm the breast cancer cells show significant polarizationtowards vessels in living mice.
-------------------------------------

10004336_234 - 0.738040580872 - science
[silicon, trivacancy, diffusion, defect, annealing]

Reconfigurations and diffusion of trivacancy in silicon
Disappearance of the divacancy (V2) and trivacancy (V3) complexes upon isochronal and isothermal annealing of electron irradiated Si:O crystals has been studied by means of deep level transient spectroscopy. The annealing studies have shown that the V2 and V3 defects are mobile in Si at T>200 °C and in oxygen-rich material are trapped by interstitial oxygen atoms so resulting in the appearance of V2O and V3O defects. The activation energies for diffusion of the V2 and V3 centers have been determined. Density functional modeling calculations have been carried out to investigate the migration and reorientation mechanisms of V3 in large silicon supercells. It is proposed that these comprise a sequence of transformations between V3(D3) and V3(C2v) configurations.
-------------------------------------

10005283_234 - 0.843362681603 - science
[keloid, scar, naevus, malignant, blue]

Keloid scar harbouring malignant blue naevus emphasises the need for excision biopsy and routine histology.
We report the finding of a malignant blue naevus of 14.3 mm Breslow thickness in association with a keloid scar on the earlobe of an Afrocaribbean gentleman. Malignant blue naevus is extremely rare and to date it has not been reported in association with keloid scars. We recommend routine histopathological examination of all excised keloid scars. Where histopathological services are limited, examination should certainly be carried out for keloids with unusual characteristics. Excision should be complete, rather than intralesional, in order to avoid leaving behind areas of potential neoplasia.
-------------------------------------

10009709_234 - 0.742902226584 - science
[serum, invasive, use, recommendation, gm, ag, ifd, cryptococcus, disease, patient]

ECIL recommendations for the use of biological markers for the diagnosis of invasive fungal diseases in leukemic patients and hematopoietic SCT recipients.
As culture-based methods for the diagnosis of invasive fungal diseases (IFD) in leukemia and hematopoietic SCT patients have limited performance, non-culture methods are increasingly being used. The third European Conference on Infections in Leukemia (ECIL-3) meeting aimed at establishing evidence-based recommendations for the use of biological tests in adult patients, based on the grading system of the Infectious Diseases Society of America. The following biomarkers were investigated as screening tests: galactomannan (GM) for invasive aspergillosis (IA); β-glucan (BG) for invasive candidiasis (IC) and IA; Cryptococcus Ag for cryptococcosis; mannan (Mn) Ag/anti-mannan (A-Mn) Ab for IC, and PCR for IA. Testing for GM, Cryptococcus Ag and BG are included in the revised EORTC/MSG (European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer/Mycoses Study Group) consensus definitions for IFD. Strong evidence supports the use of GM in serum (A II), and Cryptococcus Ag in serum and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) (A II). Evidence is moderate for BG detection in serum (B II), and the combined Mn/A-Mn testing in serum for hepatosplenic candidiasis (B III) and candidemia (C II). No recommendations were formulated for the use of PCR owing to a lack of standardization and clinical validation. Clinical utility of these markers for the early management of IFD should be further assessed in prospective randomized interventional studies.
-------------------------------------

10012709_234 - 0.823258783986 - science
[circuit, model, nucleus, basal, kitai, aspect, external, behaviour, neuron, firing]

A pulsed neural network model of bursting in the basal ganglia.
We present new techniques for extending the functionality of spiking neurons which allow the incorporation of several aspects of neuron function previously confined to the domain of low level ion-channel based models. These aspects include spontaneous (or endogenous) firing, the complex interaction of multiple ion-species and the spatial distribution of synaptic contacts over the cell membrane. These ideas are applied to a neural circuit consisting of the cortex and a subset of the nuclei in the basal ganglia-the subthalamic nucleus (STN) and the external segment of the globus pallidus (GPe). This circuit has been studied extensively in vitro by Plenz and Kitai Plenz, D., & Kitai, S. T. (1999). A basal ganglia pacemaker formed by the subthalamic nucleus and external globus pallidus. Nature, 400 677-682 whose data we use to constrain our model. With respect to this circuit, we have obtained three main results. First, that its characteristic burst firing is due to a Ca2+ current mediated mechanism. Second, that noise can assist in the generation of bursting and, paradoxically, stabilise the network behaviour under synaptic weight variations. Third, that a variety of dendritic processing is necessary in order to obtain the full range of bursting behaviour.
-------------------------------------

10008710_234 - 0.762089738318 - science
[braf, cfdna, tumour, mutation, patient, study, detection, melanoma, sample]

Detection of BRAF mutations in the tumour and serum of patients enrolled in the AZD6244 (ARRY-142886) advanced melanoma phase II study.
BACKGROUND: This study investigated the potential clinical utility of circulating free DNA (cfDNA) as a source of BRAF mutation detection in patients enrolled into a phase II study of AZD6244, a specific MEK1/2 inhibitor, in patients with advanced melanoma. METHODS: BRAF mutations were detected using Amplification Refractory Mutation System allele-specific PCR. BRAF mutation status was assessed in serum-derived cfDNA from 126 patients enrolled into the study and from 94 matched tumour samples. RESULTS: Of 94 tumour samples, 45 (47.9%) were found to be BRAF mutation positive (BRAF+). Serum-derived cfDNA was BRAF+ in 33 of 126 (26.2%) samples, including in five samples for which tumour data were unavailable. Of BRAF+ tumours, 25 of 45 (55.6%) were BRAF+ in cfDNA. In three cases in which the tumour was negative, cfDNA was BRAF+. Progression-free survival (PFS) of patients with BRAF+ tumour and cfDNA was not significantly different compared with tumour BRAF+ but cfDNA BRAF-negative patients, indicating that cfDNA BRAF detection is not associated with poorer prognosis on PFS in stage III/IV advanced melanoma. CONCLUSIONS: These data demonstrate the feasibility of BRAF mutation detection in cfDNA of patients with advanced melanoma. Future studies should aim to incorporate BRAF mutation testing in cfDNA to further validate this biomarker for patient selection.
-------------------------------------

10010304_234 - 0.930205188617 - science
[environmental, genetical, genomic, molecular, approach, perturbation, network, genetic, strategy, individual]

Generalizing genetical genomics: getting added value from environmental perturbation
Genetical genomics is a useful approach for studying the effect of genetic perturbations on biological systems at the molecular level. However, molecular networks depend on the environmental conditions and, thus, a comprehensive understanding of biological systems requires studying them across multiple environments. We propose a generalization of genetical genomics, which combines genetic and sensibly chosen environmental perturbations, to study the plasticity of molecular networks. This strategy forms a crucial step toward understanding why individuals respond differently to drugs, toxins, pathogens, nutrients and other environmental influences. Here we outline a strategy for selecting and allocating individuals to particular treatments, and we discuss the promises and pitfalls of the generalized genetical genomics approach. ?? 2008 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
-------------------------------------

10018174_234 - 0.881660426225 - science
[selenium, elemental, potential, transformation, nanosphere, different, geobacter, sulfurreducen, selenite, phase]

Investigating different mechanisms for biogenic selenite transformations: Geobacter sulfurreducens, Shewanella oneidensis and Veillonella atypica
The metal-reducing bacteria Geobacter sulfurreducens, Shewanella oneidensis and Veillonella atypica, use different mechanisms to transform toxic, bioavailable sodium selenite to less toxic, non-mobile elemental selenium and then to selenide in anaerobic environments, offering the potential for in situ and ex situ bioremediation of contaminated soils, sediments, industrial effluents, and agricultural drainage waters. The products of these reductive transformations depend on both the organism involved and the reduction conditions employed, in terms of electron donor and exogenous extracellular redox mediator. The intermediary phase involves the precipitation of elemental selenium nanospheres and the potential role of proteins in the formation of these structures is discussed. The bionanomineral phases produced during these transformations, including both elemental selenium nanospheres and metal selenide nanoparticles, have catalytic, semiconducting and light-emitting properties, which may have unique applications in the realm of nanophotonics. This research offers the potential to combine remediation of contaminants with the development of environmentally friendly manufacturing pathways for novel bionanominerals.
-------------------------------------

10004279_234 - 0.892930579118 - science
[fermion, mass]

Anomalous Fermion Mass Generation at Three Loops
We present a novel mechanism for generating gauge-invariant fermion masses through global anomalies at the three loop level. In a gauge theory, global anomalies are triggered by the possible existence of scalar or pseudoscalar states and heavy fermions, whose masses may not necessarily result from spontaneous symmetry breaking. The implications of this mass-generating mechanism for model building are discussed, including the possibility of creating low-scale fermion masses by quantum gravity effects.
-------------------------------------

10006969_234 - 0.729455458898 - science
[model, tissue, electrical, action, atrium, atrial, remodelling, wave, normal, effect]

Virtual tissue engineering of the human atrium: modelling pharmacological actions on atrial arrhythmogenesis.
Computational models of human atrial cells, tissues and atria have been developed. Cell models, for atrial wall, crista terminalis, appendage, Bachmann's bundle and pectinate myocytes are characterised by action potentials, ionic currents and action potential duration (APD) restitution. The principal effect of the ion channel remodelling of persistent atrial fibrillation (AF), and a mutation producing familial AF, was APD shortening at all rates. Electrical alternans was abolished by the modelled action of Dronedarone. AF induced gap junctional remodelling slows propagation velocity at all rates. Re-entrant spiral waves in 2-D models are characterised by their frequency, wavelength, meander and stability. For homogenous models of normal tissue, spiral waves self-terminate, due to meander to inexcitable boundaries, and by dissipation of excitation. AF electrical remodelling in these homogenous models led to persistence of spiral waves, and AF fibrotic remodelling to their breakdown into fibrillatory activity. An anatomical model of the atria was partially validated by the activation times of normal sinus rhythm. The use of tissue geometry from clinical MRI, and tissue anisotropy from ex vivo diffusion tensor magnetic resonance imaging is outlined. In the homogenous model of normal atria, a single scroll breaks down onto spatio-temporal irregularity (electrical fibrillation) that is self-terminating; while in the AF remodelled atria the fibrillatory activity is persistent. The persistence of electrical AF can be dissected in the model in terms of ion channel and intercellular coupling processes, that can be modified pharmacologically; the effects of anatomy, that can be modified by ablation; and the permanent effects of fibrosis, that need to be prevented.
-------------------------------------

10009950_234 - 0.763748950279 - science
[biology, candidosis, tj, non-pregnant, tract, journal, genital, obstetrics, gynecology, european]

Candidosis of the genital tract in non-pregnant women.
TJ: EUROPEAN JOURNAL OF OBSTETRICS, GYNECOLOGY, AND REPRODUCTIVE BIOLOGY.
-------------------------------------

10009976_234 - 0.865052991686 - science
[antigen, aspergillosis, infection, invasive, antibody, attempt, convalescent, antiserum]

Sero-diagnosis of invasive aspergillosis: attempts to determine antigen and antibody relevance to infection.
Attempt was made to define antigens and antisera which might prove useful in diagnosis of invasive aspergillosis in man. A convalescent antiserum (serum from rabbits after liver infection with Aspergillus fumigatus conidia) which might be more representative of immunological reaction to fungal growth in vivo, did not react in enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay with commerical antigens which are used at present in attempts to detect antibody response in systemic infections in man. However, this convalescent antiserum reacted with antigens from a range of fungal extracts. Antigens from young culture filtrates in particular the 24th culture filtrate are advocated as the standard antigens for antibody detection using conventional immunoprecipitation techniques. For the detection of circulating antigens, the use of convalescent antiserum in enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay might be promising in the early diagnosis of invasive aspergillosis.
-------------------------------------

10011087_234 - 0.930539702871 - science
[electrochemical, formation, green, study, time-resolved, x-ray, rust, sulfate, scattering]

Formation of green rust sulfate: A combined in situ time-resolved X-ray scattering and electrochemical study
cited By (since 1996) 6
-------------------------------------

10008198_234 - 0.733360462925 - science
[density, breast, cancer, risk, change, screen, mammogram]

Longitudinal Change in Mammographic Density and Association with Breast Cancer Risk: a Case-Control Study
High mammographic breast density is associated with increased risk of breast cancer, but how risk varies with longitudinal change in density is less clear. To investigate, a case-control study of 30 women with screen-detected cancer and 30 women with a normal mammogram, all with two previous nor-mal mammograms, was conducted. Percentage density for all mammograms was estimated with the thresholding software Cumulus. Mean density at first screen was not significantly different in cases and controls in contralateral (36.5 vs. 32.6, p = 0.23) or ipsilateral (36.0 vs. 32.9 p = 0.37) breasts, but mean re-duction in density from first to third screen was significantly different in both contralateral (10.7 vs. 5.1, p = 0.02) and ipsilateral (11.7 vs. 6.2, p = 0.04) breasts. Using logistic regression, and controlling for age and HRT use, breast cancer risk was found to be associated with change in density from first to third screen.
-------------------------------------

10005259_234 - 0.844597227359 - science
[technique, radial, vessel, distal, artery]

Distal revascularisation/replantation using the reversed radial artery.
We describe a technique using the reversed radial artery for distal revascularisation or replantation in the hand. This technique has been used for revascularisation following crush avulsion injuries associated with a large zone of trauma and polydigit replantation. The technique involves dividing the radial artery and venae comitantes proximally and mobilising it distally into the hand for anastomosis. Temporary 'syndactylisation' of adjacent digits is also described. This can be used to convert multiple digits into a single vascular unit and to provide a bed for the transposed radial vessels. These techniques are an option when there is extensive injury to distal vessels such that end-to-end anastomosis is not possible and interposition venous micrografting may be difficult or prone to failure due to poor quality recipient vessels and the need to place grafts in a traumatised bed.
-------------------------------------

10005301_234 - 0.740885552587 - science
[postsynaptic, receptor, psd, synaptic, structure, psd-95, mechanism, membrane]

A Structural Investigation of the Postsynaptic Density Protein, PSD-95
The mechanism known as Long-Term Potentiation (LTP), which is perhaps the most established mechanism associated with memory and learning, describes the Hebbian postulate that “neurons that fire together, wire together”.  LTP refers to the upregulation of synaptic strength in response to high activity and can be subdivided into distinct phases.  Early-LTP involves the phosphorylation of neurotransmitter receptors while Late-LTP involves the increase in expression of receptors at the postsynaptic membrane.  These are long-term, stable perturbations of synaptic activity, lasting from hours to weeks.  However, more subtle mechanisms controlling shorter-term plastic changes in synaptic function lie in the spatial distribution of postsynaptic receptors.  In glutamatergic synapses within the mammalian CNS the distribution of neurotransmitter receptors is controlled by a scaffold of proteins under the postsynaptic membrane known as the PostSynaptic Density (PSD). This complex has been observed to change shape on a rapid scale, however little is understood about its macromolecular structure.The PSD anchors glutamate receptors within the postsynaptic membrane along with metabotropic receptors and cytoplasmic enzymes that modulate synaptic function and PSD and dendritic spine morphology.  Much of what is understood on the macro-molecular structure of the PSD is based on knowledge of known binding partners.  A recent paper within the group presented the PSD-95-Kir2.1 sub-complex of the PSD using a multi-disciplinary structural approach, blending Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM) and solution scattering models with high-resolution X-ray and NMR structures for individual folded domains.  In this thesis the solution state structure of PSD-95 is examined more closely.  Deletion constructs of PSD-95 have been obtained by expressing subcloned fragments of the gene from Homo sapiens in an E. coli expression system and purifying them through a combination of IMAC, ion exchange chromatography and gel filtration.  The PDZ region is rigorously described using Small Angle X-ray Scattering and is orthogonally validated by comparing the models against hydrodynamic data for the constructs.  The PDZ12 region was crystallized and subjected to extensive optimisation to improve the resulting diffraction, falling just short of a molecular replacement structure.  Attempts were made to crystallize the PDZ3 domain with the K¬ir¬2.1 C-terminus.  PSD-95 dynamics was also investigated using Deuterium Exchange Mass Spectrometry (DXMS) to test a hypothesis for an internal binding interaction but was found not to be present using the methods developed.
-------------------------------------

10010962_234 - 0.856786984231 - science
[cell, cancer, stromal, fibroblast, tumor]

Stromal-epithelial metabolic coupling in cancer: integrating autophagy and metabolism in the tumor microenvironment.
Cancer cells do not exist as pure homogeneous populations in vivo. Instead they are embedded in "cancer cell nests" that are surrounded by stromal cells, especially cancer associated fibroblasts. Thus, it is not unreasonable to suspect that stromal fibroblasts could influence the metabolism of adjacent cancer cells, and visa versa. In accordance with this idea, we have recently proposed that the Warburg effect in cancer cells may be due to culturing cancer cells by themselves, out of their normal stromal context or tumor microenvironment. In fact, when cancer cells are co-cultured with fibroblasts, then cancer cells increase their mitochondrial mass, while fibroblasts lose their mitochondria. An in depth analysis of this phenomenon reveals that aggressive cancer cells are "parasites" that use oxidative stress as a "weapon" to extract nutrients from surrounding stromal cells. Oxidative stress in fibroblasts induces the autophagic destruction of mitochondria, by mitophagy. Then, stromal cells are forced to undergo aerobic glycolysis, and produce energy-rich nutrients (such as lactate and ketones) to "feed" cancer cells. This mechanism would allow cancer cells to seed anywhere, without blood vessels as a food source, as they could simply induce oxidative stress wherever they go, explaining how cancer cells survive during metastasis. We suggest that stromal catabolism, via autophagy and mitophagy, fuels the anabolic growth of tumor cells, promoting tumor progression and metastasis. We have previously termed this new paradigm "The Autophagic Tumor Stroma Model of Cancer Metabolism", or the "Reverse Warburg Effect". We also discuss how glutamine addiction (glutaminolysis) in cancer cells fits well with this new model, by promoting oxidative mitochondrial metabolism in aggressive cancer cells.
-------------------------------------

10011016_234 - 0.786167131457 - science
[fe, condition, alkaline, crystallization, pb, hematite, effect]

Crystallization of hematite (??-Fe 2O 3) under alkaline condition: The effects of Pb
cited By (since 1996) 3
-------------------------------------

10011803_234 - 0.791752266427 - science
[bone]

Microfocus small angle X-ray scattering reveals structural features in archaeological bone samples: Detection of changes in bone mineral habit and size
Times Cited: 17
-------------------------------------

10003469_234 - 0.834565724628 - science
[neurotransmitter, astrocyte, extracellular, space, cell, chemical, neural]

Neurotransmitters and Integration in Neuronal-Astroglial Networks.
Two major neural cell types, glia, astrocytes in particular, and neurones can release chemical transmitters that act as soluble signalling compounds for intercellular communication. Exocytosis, a process which depends on an increase in cytosolic Ca(2+) levels, represents a common denominator for release of neurotransmitters, stored in secretory vesicles, from these neural cells. While neurones rely predominately on the immediate entry of Ca(2+) from the extracellular space to the cytosol in this process, astrocytes support their cytosolic Ca(2+) increases by appropriating this ion from the intracellular endoplasmic reticulum store and extracellular space. Additionally, astrocytes can release neurotransmitters using a variety of non-vesicular pathways which are mediated by an assortment of plasmalemmal channels and transporters. Once a neuronal and/or astrocytic neurotransmitter is released into the extracellular space, it can activate plasma membrane neurotransmitter receptors on neural cells, causing autocrine and/or paracrine signalling. Moreover, chemical transmission is essential not only for homocellular, but also for heterocellular bi-directional communication in the brain. Further detailed understanding of chemical transmission will aid our comprehension of the brain (dys)function in heath and disease.
-------------------------------------

10009361_234 - 0.743803979998 - science
[footprint, surface, tof-sim, cell, bacterial, eukaryotic]

Spectroscopy in the analysis of bacterial and eukaryotic cell footprints on implant surfaces.
We tested the suitability of two spectroscopic methods, x-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and time of flight secondary ion mass spectrometry (ToF-SIMS), in the recognition of bacterial and eukaryotic cell footprints on implant surfaces. Human mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) and Staphylococcus aureus were cultured on sample surfaces and detached using trypsin. Scanning electron microscopy confirmed that the processed surfaces did not contain any human or microbial cells. The footprints were then analysed using XPS and ToF-SIMS. XPS results showed no significant differences between the footprints, but principal component analysis of the ToF-SIMS data enabled clear separation of MSC-footprints from the S. aureus and co-culture footprints (p < 0.03). ToF-SIMS also demonstrated 'race for the surface' between proteins, which suggest surface charge (zeta-potential) dependent protein adsorption. ToF-SIMS differentiated eukaryotic and bacterial footprints and has potential for post-hoc detection of implant-related infections based on the typical ToF-SIMS spectra.
-------------------------------------

10007000_234 - 0.91541814203 - science
[digestion, blg, reactivity, allergenic, pc]

Effect of simulated gastro-duodenal digestion on the allergenic reactivity of beta-lactoglobulin.
UNLABELLED: ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Cow's milk (CM) allergy affects about 2% of infants. The allergenicity of dietary proteins, including those from CM, has been related to their digestibility although the generality of the link and its causality remains to be demonstrated. In this study we use an in vitro digestion system, to investigate the digestibility of β-lactoglobulin (blg) during gastrointestinal transit and to assess the impact of this process on blg allergenic reactivity in CM allergic children. METHODS: Blg digesta were prepared using an in vitro digestion protocol simulating either gastric digestion alone or followed by duodenal digestion with or without phosphatidylcholine (PC). Biochemical analysis of blg digesta was performed by SDS-PAGE and their concentration was measured by a sandwich ELISA. Assessment of their allergenic reactivity was done in vitro by EAST inhibition, specific basophil activation (basotest) and lymphocyte proliferation (PCNA-flow cytometry) assays using sera and cells from patients allergic to blg and in vivo by skin prick testing (SPT) of these patients. RESULTS: Blg was only broken down to smaller peptides after gastro-duodenal digestion although a sizeable amount of intact protein still remained. Digestion did not modify the IgE binding capacity of blg except for gastro-duodenal digestion performed in the absence of PC. These results are consistent with the quantity of intact blg remaining in the digesta. Overall both gastric and gastroduodenal digestion enhanced activation of sensitized basophils and proliferation of sensitized lymphocytes by blg. However, there was a tendency towards reduction in mean diameter of SPT following digestion, the PC alone during phase 1 digestion causing a significant increase in mean diameter. CONCLUSIONS: Digestion did not reduce the allergenic reactivity of blg to a clinically insignificant extent, PC inhibiting digestion and thereby protecting blg allergenic reactivity. SPT reactivity was reduced compared to blg immunoreactivity in in vitro tests.
-------------------------------------

10008312_234 - 0.775829546183 - science
[cell, np, neurite, outgrowth, degenerate, human, bdnf]

Degenerate Human Nucleus Pulposus Cells Promote Neurite Outgrowth in Neural Cells
Innervation of nociceptive nerve fibres into the normally aneural nucleus pulposus (NP) of the intervertebral disc (IVD) occurs during degeneration resulting in discogenic back pain. The neurotrophins nerve growth factor (NGF) and brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF), which are associated with stimulation of axonal outgrowth and nociception by neuronal cells, are both expressed by NP cells, with BDNF levels increasing with disease severity. However the mechanism of interaction between human NP cells and neural cells has yet to be fully elucidated. Therefore the aim of this study was to determine whether non-degenerate or degenerate human NP cells inhibit or stimulate neural outgrowth and whether any outgrowth is mediated by NGF or BDNF. Human NP cells from non-degenerate and degenerate IVD were cultured in alginate beads then co-cultured for 48 hours with human SH-SY5Y neuroblastoma cells. Co-culture of non-degenerate NP cells with neural cells resulted in both an inhibition of neurite outgrowth and reduction in percentage of neurite expressing cells. Conversely co-culture with degenerate NP cells resulted in an increase in both neurite length and percentage of neurite expressing cells. Addition of anti-NGF to the co-culture with degenerate cells resulted in a decrease in percentage of neurite expressing cells, while addition of anti-BDNF resulted in a decrease in both neurite length and percentage of neurite expressing cells. Our findings show that while non-degenerate NP cells are capable of inhibiting neurite outgrowth from human neural cells, degenerate NP cells stimulate outgrowth. Neurotrophin blocking studies demonstrated that both NGF and BDNF, secreted by degenerate NP cells, may play a role in this stimulation with BDNF potentially playing the predominant role. These findings suggest that NP cells are capable of regulating nerve ingrowth and that neoinnervation occurring during IVD degeneration may be stimulated by the NP cells themselves.
-------------------------------------

10009507_234 - 0.800701563285 - science
[lignin]

Off-line pyrolysis and compound-specific stable carbon isotope analysis of lignin moieties: a new method for determining the fate of lignin residues in soil
Dungait, Jennifer A. J. Stear, Natalie A. van Dongen, Bart E. Bol, Roland Evershed, Richard P.
-------------------------------------

10004706_234 - 0.81924405939 - science
[erad, translocation, phylogenetic, importomer, peroxisomal, mechanistic, protein, eukaryotic, analysis, selma]

Making new out of old: recycling and modification of an ancient protein translocation system during eukaryotic evolution. Mechanistic comparison and phylogenetic analysis of ERAD, SELMA and the peroxisomal importomer.
At first glance the three eukaryotic protein translocation machineries-the ER-associated degradation (ERAD) transport apparatus of the endoplasmic reticulum, the peroxisomal importomer and SELMA, the pre-protein translocator of complex plastids-appear quite different. However, mechanistic comparisons and phylogenetic analyses presented here suggest that all three translocation machineries share a common ancestral origin, which highlights the recycling of pre-existing components as an effective evolutionary driving force. Editor's suggested further reading in BioEssays ERAD ubiquitin ligases Abstract.
-------------------------------------

10018159_234 - 0.853511527927 - science
[tc, phase, sediment, hydrous, reoxidation, tco2-like, fe, behaviour, amorphous, tco4]

An X-ray absorption study of the fate of technetium in reduced and reoxidised sediments and mineral phases
Technetium is a long lived (2.13 x 10(5) a), beta emitting radionuclide which is a groundwater contaminant at a number of nuclear facilities throughout the world. Its environmental behaviour is primarily governed by its redox state. Under oxic conditions it forms the highly soluble pertechnetate (TcO4-) ion; under reducing conditions it forms the poorly soluble, reduced forms of Tc, particularly the Tc(IV) ion which is expected to precipitate as hydrous TcO2 above its solubility limit (10(-9) mol l(-1) at similar to pH 7) or to be strongly sorbed to mineral surfaces at lower concentrations. Thus the redox cycling behaviour of Tc is predicted to be key to its environmental behaviour in the natural and engineered environment. Here the results of a series of X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS) experiments which examine the oxidation state and coordination environment of Tc in a range of estuarine, aquifer and freshwater sediment suspensions, and in an environmentally relevant amorphous Fe(II) phase under both reduced and reoxidised biogeochemical conditions are presented. In reduced sediments and the amorphous Fe(II) phase prior to reoxidation, XAS results show that Tc was retained as hydrous TcO2-like phases across all samples. Under air reoxidation, experiments showed significant (up to 80\%) remobilisation of Tc to solution as TcO4-. In pre-reduced freshwater sediments, aquifer sediments and the amorphous Fe(II) phase oxidised with air, XAS indicated that Tc remained associated with the solids as hydrous TcO2-like phases. By contrast, in air reoxidised estuarine sediment XAS analysis suggested that both hydrous TcO2-like phases and TcO4 were retained within the sediment. Finally, when microbial ly-mediated NO3 reoxidation occurred in estuarine and aquifer sediment slurries, experiments showed comparatively low (<8\%) remobilisation of Tc from solids over similar timescales to air reoxidation experiments, whilst XAS again showed that both hydrous TcO2-like phases and TcO4 were retained within the sediment. By contrast, in the amorphous Fe(II) phase, although NO3 reoxidation again led to low (<4\%) remobilisation of Tc from solids, XAS analysis showed that Tc was retained as hydrous TcO2-like phases alone. These results are discussed in the context of the redox cycling behaviour of Tc in the natural and engineered environment. (C) 2007 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
-------------------------------------

10008625_234 - 0.891037354439 - science
[chemical, epigenetic, allergic, mechanism, response, immune, drug, allergen]

Regulation of Allergic Responses to Chemicals and Drugs: Possible Roles of Epigenetic Mechanisms.
There is increasing evidence that epigenetic regulation of gene expression plays a pivotal role in the orchestration of immune and allergic responses. Such regulatory mechanisms have potentially important implications for the acquisition of sensitization to chemical and drug allergens, and in determining the vigor, characteristics and longevity of allergic responses. Importantly, the discovery of long-lasting epigenetic alterations in specific immunoregulatory genes provides a mechanistic basis for immune cell memory, and thereby the potential of chemical allergens to influence the subsequent orientation of the adaptive immune system. In this article we consider the implications of epigenetic mechanisms for the development of sensitization to chemical and drug allergens and the form that allergic reactions will take.
-------------------------------------

10003295_234 - 0.928307154163 - science
[skin, lesional, ll-37, expression, immunoreactivity, epidermis, amp, hf, inflammation, apocrine]

Immunohistological pointers to a possible role for excessive cathelicidin (LL-37) expression by apocrine sweat glands in the pathogenesis of hidradenitis suppurativa/acne inversa.
BACKGROUND:   The cause of follicular occlusion, a key early event in the pathogenesis of hidradenitis suppurativa (HS), also known as acne inversa, remains unknown. OBJECTIVES: To identify changes, if any, in the antimicrobial peptide (AMP) and cytokine expression profile of HS affected human skin. METHODS: Quantitative immunohistomorphometry was used to compare the in situ protein expression of selected AMPs and cytokines in lesional HS skin from 18 patients with that in healthy skin (n = 12). The lesional skin from patients with HS was histologically subclassified based on the predominance of inflammation vs. scarring. RESULTS: Compared with healthy controls, significantly increased immunoreactivity for cathelicidin (LL-37) was noted in the apocrine sweat gland and distal outer root sheath (ORS) of the hair follicle (HF) epithelium in lesional HS skin. Immunoreactivity for LL-37, psoriasin, human β-defensin 3 (hBD3), α-melanocyte stimulating hormone (α-MSH), macrophage migration inhibitory factor (MIF), tumour necrosis factor (TNF)-α and interleukin (IL)-8 was significantly increased in HS epidermis. LL-37 and TNF-α immunoreactivity was also increased in the dermis of lesional HS skin. In contrast, lysozyme expression was decreased in the epidermis of lesional HS skin, while that of TNF-α and IL-8 was decreased in the proximal ORS of HFs in HS lesions. These differences were most pronounced in HS with predominant inflammation. CONCLUSIONS:   Our observations raise the question as to whether excessive secretion of AMPs by the skin, in particular by the apocrine sweat glands, distal HF epithelium, and epidermis, may attract inflammation and thus facilitate or promote HS development.
-------------------------------------

10004006_234 - 0.714395686326 - science
[pain, cwp, variant, genetic, association]

Genome-wide association study meta-analysis of chronic widespread pain: evidence for involvement of the 5p15.2 region.
BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Chronic widespread pain (CWP) is a common disorder affecting ∼10% of the general population and has an estimated heritability of 48-52%. In the first large-scale genome-wide association study (GWAS) meta-analysis, we aimed to identify common genetic variants associated with CWP. METHODS: We conducted a GWAS meta-analysis in 1308 female CWP cases and 5791 controls of European descent, and replicated the effects of the genetic variants with suggestive evidence for association in 1480 CWP cases and 7989 controls. Subsequently, we studied gene expression levels of the nearest genes in two chronic inflammatory pain mouse models, and examined 92 genetic variants previously described associated with pain. RESULTS: The minor C-allele of rs13361160 on chromosome 5p15.2, located upstream of chaperonin-containing-TCP1-complex-5 gene (CCT5) and downstream of FAM173B, was found to be associated with a 30% higher risk of CWP (minor allele frequency=43%; OR=1.30, 95% CI 1.19 to 1.42, p=1.2×10(-8)). Combined with the replication, we observed a slightly attenuated OR of 1.17 (95% CI 1.10 to 1.24, p=4.7×10(-7)) with moderate heterogeneity (I2=28.4%). However, in a sensitivity analysis that only allowed studies with joint-specific pain, the combined association was genome-wide significant (OR=1.23, 95% CI 1.14 to 1.32, p=3.4×10(-8), I2=0%). Expression levels of Cct5 and Fam173b in mice with inflammatory pain were higher in the lumbar spinal cord, not in the lumbar dorsal root ganglions, compared to mice without pain. None of the 92 genetic variants previously described were significantly associated with pain (p>7.7×10(-4)). CONCLUSIONS: We identified a common genetic variant on chromosome 5p15.2 associated with joint-specific CWP in humans. This work suggests that CCT5 and FAM173B are promising targets in the regulation of pain.
-------------------------------------

10018344_234 - 0.901617606463 - science
[pathway, innate, classical, bacterial, immunity, complement, response, component, pathogen, igm]

The classical pathway is the dominant complement pathway required for innate immunity to Streptococcus pneumoniae infection in mice.
The complement system is an important component of the innate immune response to bacterial pathogens, including Streptococcus pneumoniae. The classical complement pathway is activated by antibody-antigen complexes on the bacterial surface and has been considered predominately to be an effector of the adaptive immune response, whereas the alternative and mannose-binding lectin pathways are activated directly by bacterial cell surface components and are considered effectors of the innate immune response. Recently, a role has been suggested for the classical pathway during innate immunity that is activated by natural IgM or components of the acute-phase response bound to bacterial pathogens. However, the functional importance of the classical pathway for innate immunity to S. pneumoniae and other bacterial pathogens, and its relative contribution compared with the alternative and mannose-binding lectin pathways has not been defined. By using strains of mice with genetic deficiencies of complement components and secretory IgM we have investigated the role of each complement pathway and natural IgM for innate immunity to S. pneumoniae. Our results show that the proportion of a population of S. pneumoniae bound by C3 depends mainly on the classical pathway, whereas the intensity of C3 binding depends on the alternative pathway. Furthermore, the classical pathway, partially targeted by the binding of natural IgM to bacteria, is the dominant pathway for activation of the complement system during innate immunity to S. pneumoniae, loss of which results in rapidly progressing septicemia and impaired macrophage activation. These data demonstrate the vital role of the classical pathway for innate immunity to a bacterial pathogen.
-------------------------------------

10007015_234 - 0.782016689994 - science
[particle, size, primary, model, bl, aerosol, uncertainty]

Primary versus secondary contributions to particle number concentrations in the European boundary layer
It is important to understand the relative contribution of primary and secondary particles to regional and global aerosol so that models can attribute aerosol radiative forcing to different sources. In large-scale models, there is considerable uncertainty associated with treatments of particle formation (nucleation) in the boundary layer (BL) and in the size distribution of emitted primary particles, leading to uncertainties in predicted cloud condensation nuclei (CCN) concentrations. Here we quantify how primary particle emissions and secondary particle formation influence size-resolved particle number concentrations in the BL using a global aerosol microphysics model and aircraft and ground site observations made during the May 2008 campaign of the European Integrated Project on Aerosol Cloud Climate Air Quality Interactions (EUCAARI). We tested four different parameterisations for BL nucleation and two assumptions for the emission size distribution of anthropogenic and wildfire carbonaceous particles. When we emit carbonaceous particles at small sizes (as recommended by the Aerosol Inter-comparison project, AEROCOM), the spatial distributions of campaign-mean number concentrations of particles with diameter >50 nm (N-50) and >100 nm (N-100) were well captured by the model (R-2 >= 0.8) and the normalised mean bias (NMB) was also small (-18\% for N-50 and -1\% for N-100). Emission of carbonaceous particles at larger sizes, which we consider to be more realistic for low spatial resolution global models, results in equally good correlation but larger bias (R-2 >= 0.8, NMB = -52\% and -29\%), which could be partly but not entirely compensated by BL nucleation. Within the uncertainty of the observations and accounting for the uncertainty in the size of emitted primary particles, BL nucleation makes a statistically significant contribution to CCN-sized particles at less than a quarter of the ground sites. Our results show that a major source of uncertainty in CCN-sized particles in polluted European air is the emitted size of primary carbonaceous particles. New information is required not just from direct observations, but also to determine the ``effective emission size{''} and composition of primary particles appropriate for different resolution models.
-------------------------------------

10007632_234 - 0.891959402834 - science
[photoageing, consequence, protein, extracellular, ultraviolet, skin, differential]

Chemical consequences of cutaneous photoageing
Human skin, in common with other organs, ages as a consequence of the passage of time, but in areas exposed to solar ultraviolet radiation, the effects of this intrinsic ageing process are exacerbated. In particular, both the severity and speed of onset of age-related changes, such as wrinkle formation and loss of elasticity, are enhanced in photoaged (also termed extrinsically aged) as compared with aged, photoprotected, skin. The anatomy of skin is characterised by two major layers: an outer, avascular, yet highly cellular and dynamic epidermis and an underlying vascularised, comparatively static and cell-poor, dermis. The structural consequences of photoageing are mainly evident in the extracellular matrix-rich but cell-poor dermis where key extracellular matrix proteins are particularly susceptible to photodamage. Most investigations to date have concentrated on the cell as both a target for and mediator of, ultraviolet radiation-induced photoageing. As the main effectors of dermal remodelling produced by cells (extracellular proteases) generally have low substrate specificity, we recently suggested that the differential susceptibility of key extracellular matrix proteins to the processes of photoageing may be due to direct, as opposed to cell-mediated, photodamage. In this review, we discuss the experimental evidence for ultraviolet radiation (and related reactive oxygen species)mediated differential degradation of normally long lived dermal proteins including the fibrillar collagens, elastic fibre components, glycoproteins and proteoglycans. Whilst these components exhibit highly diverse primary and hence macro-and supra-molecular structures, we present evidence that amino acid composition alone may be a useful predictor of age-related protein degradation in both photoexposed and, as a consequence of differential oxidation sensitivity, photoprotected, tissues.
-------------------------------------

10018301_234 - 0.873664702697 - science
[response, cell, flagellin, lung, tlr5, radioresistant, tlr4, immune, respiratory, innate]

Radioresistant cells expressing TLR5 control the respiratory epithelium's innate immune responses to flagellin.
Bacterial products (such as endotoxins and flagellin) trigger innate immune responses through TLRs. Flagellin-induced signalling involves TLR5 and MyD88 and, according to some reports, TLR4. Whereas epithelial and dendritic cells are stimulated by flagellin in vitro, the cell contribution to the in vivo response is still unclear. Here, we studied the respective roles of radioresistant and radiosensitive cells in flagellin-induced airway inflammation in mice. We found that i.n. delivery of flagellin elicits a transient change in respiratory function and an acute, pro-inflammatory response in the lungs, characterized by TLR5- and MyD88-dependent chemokine secretion and neutrophil recruitment. In contrast, TLR4, CD14 and TRIF were not essential for flagellin-mediated responses, indicating that TLR4 does not cooperate with TLR5 in the lungs. Respiratory function, chemokine secretion and airway infiltration by neutrophils were dependent on radioresistant, TLR5-expressing cells. Furthermore, lung haematopoietic cells also responded to flagellin by activating TNF-alpha production. We suggest that the radioresistant lung epithelial cells are essential for initiating early, TLR5-dependent signalling in response to flagellin and thus triggering the lung's innate immune responses.
-------------------------------------

10011959_234 - 0.827838045189 - science
[hdac, brain, ffaha, imaging]

Imaging epigenetic regulation by histone deacetylases in the brain using PET/MRI with 18F-FAHA.
Epigenetic modifications mediated by histone deacetylases (HDACs) play important roles in the mechanisms of different neurologic diseases and HDAC inhibitors (HDACIs) have shown promise in therapy. However, pharmacodynamic profiles of many HDACIs in the brain remain largely unknown due to the lack of validated methods for noninvasive imaging of HDAC expression-activity. In this study, dynamic PET/CT imaging was performed in 4 rhesus macaques using (18)FFAHA, a novel HDAC substrate, and (18)Ffluoroacetate, the major radio-metabolite of (18)FFAHA, and fused with corresponding MR images of the brain. Quantification of (18)FFAHA accumulation in the brain was performed using a customized dual-tracer pharmacokinetic model. Immunohistochemical analyses of brain tissue revealed the heterogeneity of expression of individual HDACs in different brain structures and cell types and confirmed that PET/CT/MRI with (18)FFAHA reflects the level of expression-activity of HDAC class IIa enzymes. Furthermore, PET/CT/MRI with (18)FFAHA enabled non-invasive, quantitative assessment of pharmacodynamics of HDAC inhibitor SAHA in the brain.
-------------------------------------

10005198_234 - 0.951458099353 - science
[excimer, molecule, superfluid, temperature]

Observation of Crossover from Ballistic to Diffusion Regime for Excimer Molecules in Superfluid 4He
We have measured the temperature dependence of the time of flight of helium excimer molecules in superfluid 4He and find that the molecules behave ballistically below ∼100 mK and exhibit Brownian motion above ∼200 mK. In the intermediate temperature range the transport cannot be described by either of the models.
-------------------------------------

10016988_234 - 0.782968408127 - science
[itch, temporal, signal, gyrus, study]

A temporal analysis of the central neural processing of itch.
BACKGROUND: Pruritus, or itch, is the most prevalent symptom of allergic and inflammatory skin disease. Although it is known that itch induces activation of a neural network in the brain, the temporal dynamics of the network as well as the pathophysiology and neurobiology are not well understood. OBJECTIVES: The study aimed to elucidate (i) the temporal dynamics of the itch response identified in earlier studies and (ii) the relationship between central and subjective responses to itch. METHODS: Using a novel time-series analysis, we performed a double-blind, placebo-controlled, randomized, within-subject functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) study of the cerebral processing of histamine-induced itch in healthy volunteers (n = 16) by tracking the 8-min period following a single skin prick. RESULTS: Histamine-induced itch compared with saline resulted in significant area under the curve blood oxygen level dependent (BOLD) signal changes in the middle/superior temporal gyrus and right inferior frontal gyrus/insula. We observed negative itch-induced BOLD signal changes compared with saline in (i) the pregenual anterior cingulate cortex (ACC)/medial frontal gyrus, (ii) subgenual ACC/ventral striatum, (iii) bilateral temporal pole/parahippocampal gyrus and (iv) several regions within the cerebellum. We noted a trend significance in the left precentral gyrus part of the motor cortex. The BOLD signal change in several of these regions correlated with perception of itch intensity. CONCLUSIONS: In contrast to other fMRI studies we observed a multifocal negative signal. An improved understanding of both activated and deactivated brain regions during the itch response may in the long term facilitate development of more effective management strategies.
-------------------------------------

10003280_234 - 0.859404590908 - science
[hair, ftir, tissue, follicle]

Visualization and characterisation of defined hair follicle compartments by Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) imaging without labelling.
BACKGROUND: To visualise and characterise skin architecture, the tissue usually has to be destroyed and labelled. OBJECTIVES: The use of Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy as a label-free, minimally sample destructive method to define hair follicular structure has been explored and demonstrated in this paper. METHODS: Human scalp skin cryosections were imaged using FTIR microscopy and the data was subsequently analysed with N-FINDR spectral unmixing algorithm. RESULTS: This resulted in an excellent distinction of known hair follicle tissue layers, which could be discerned based on their molecular structure. CONCLUSION: The development of a minimally sample-destructive, label-free spectroscopy based technique that can differentiate layers of cells in the dermal papilla and connective tissue sheath in the mesenchyme of the hair follicle paves the way forward to identifying spectral markers important in wound healing and stem cell therapies.
-------------------------------------

10017923_234 - 0.927040943074 - science
[microfibril, uvb, fibrillin, flexion, mmp-3, irradiation, exposure, degradation, angle]

A common pathway for age-related protein oxidation and photoageing
Remodelling of extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins as a result of solar ultraviolet radiation (UVR) exposure plays a key role in skin photoageing. We have recently demonstrated that UVR-chromophore-rich fibrillin microfibrils undergo photodegradation following UV irradiation in a cell-free environment. In this study, we test the hypotheses that fibrillin microfibril degradation following UVR exposure: i) occurs via the photodynamic production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and; ii) alters the susceptibility of resultant microfibril photoproducts to protease-mediated degradation.   Fibrillin microfibrils were isolated from cultured human dermal fibroblasts. Microfibril structure after UVB irradiation (Phillips TL-12 source; 500mJ/cm2) in ambient and O2-depleted conditions or after treatment with H2O2 (40mM; up to 2hrs) was quantified by atomic force microscopy (AFM). The effect of UVB irradiation (50mJ/cm2) on the susceptibility of microfibrils to MMP-3 proteolysis was also quantified by AFM.   In ambient oxygen, UVB irradiation caused a dose-dependent decrease in median fibrillin microfibril flexion angle. However, in an O2-depleted environment the UVB mediated effects were significantly abrogated. Structural changes were mimicked by exposure to H2O2.    Individually, UVB or MMP-3 significantly decreased the median microfibril flexion angle. However, addition of MMP-3 to UVB irradiated microfibrils appeared to selectively degrade low flexion angle fibrillin microfibrils leaving a population with a median flexion angle that was not significantly different to the controls.   These observations suggest that UVB degradation involves the photodynamic formation of ROS and that exposure to H2O2 can mimic the effects of UVB degradation. Furthermore, MMP-3 appears to selectively degrade UVB-damaged fibrillin microfibrils in vitro
-------------------------------------

10016817_234 - 0.843965567538 - science
[gene, cluster, balhimycin, biosynthesis, sequence, bbr]

The border sequence of the balhimycin biosynthesis gene cluster from Amycolatopsis balhimycina contains bbr, encoding a StrR-like pathway-specific regulator
Balhimycin, produced by the actinomycete Amycolatopsis balhimycina DSM5908, is a glycopeptide antibiotic highly similar to vancomycin, the antibiotic of 'last resort' used for the treatment of resistant Gram-positive pathogenic bacteria. Partial sequence of the balhimycin biosynthesis gene cluster was previously reported. In this work, cosmids which overlap the region of the characterized gene cluster were isolated and sequenced. At the 'left' end of the cluster, genes were identified which are involved in balhimycin biosynthesis, transport, resistance and regulation. The 'right' end border is defined by a putative 3-deoxy-D-arabino-heptulosonate 7-phosphate synthase (dahp) gene. The proximate gene is similar to a type I polyketide synthase gene of the rifamycin producer Amycolatopsis mediterranei indicating that another biosynthesis gene cluster might be located directly next to the balhimycin gene cluster. The newly identified StrR-like pathway-specific regulator, Bbr, was characterized to be a DNA-binding protein and may have a role in balhimycin biosynthesis. Purified N-terminally His-tagged Bbr shows specific DNA-binding to five promoter regions within the gene cluster. By in silico analysis and by comparison of the DNA sequences binding Bbr, conserved inverted repeat sequences for the Bbr-binding site are proposed. The putative Bbr consensus sequence differs from that published for StrR. Copyright ?? 2007 S. Karger AG.
-------------------------------------

10008653_234 - 0.855526012773 - science
[times, competition, gene, molecular, expression, cited, networks, flux]

How Molecular Competition Influences Fluxes in Gene Expression Networks
Times Cited: 2
-------------------------------------

10010308_234 - 0.88099796512 - science
[metabolism, analysis]

Metabolomic analysis of a synthetic metabolic switch in Streptomyces coelicolor A3(2)
The global analysis of metabolism by liquid chromatography coupled to mass spectrometry is often hampered by a large amount of biological and technical variability. Here, we introduce an experimental and analytical strategy that can produce robust metabolome profiles in the face of this challenge. By applying a new computational approach based on concordance analysis to an extremely large number of analytical replicates, we are able to show that the overexpression of an antisense non-coding {RNA} targeting glutamine synthetase I results in a major reorganization of the metabolism of Streptomyces coelicolor, the model species of antibiotic-producing bacteria. We identified 97 metabolites with statistically significant reproducible dynamic behavior across the time series. The observed metabolic changes are very rapid, specific and widespread across metabolism, but focus on the nitrogen assimilation pathways. Our results demonstrate the power of highly replicated experimental designs for the robust characterization of metabolite dynamics. The identified global rearrangement of metabolism suggests the usefulness of {RNA} interference as an efficient strategy to manipulate the physiology of bacteria with wider biotechnological applicability in microorganisms. ?? 2011 {WILEY-VCH} Verlag {GmbH} \& Co. {KGaA}, Weinheim.
-------------------------------------

10007230_234 - 0.85733036112 - science
[mutation, atrial, s140g, excitation, kcnq1, rate, fibrillation]

Pro-arrhythmogenic effects of the S140G KCNQ1 mutation in human atrial fibrillation - insights from modelling.
Key points  A previous study has identified a gene mutation (KCNQ1 S140G) in some patients with a familial form of atrial fibrillation, one of the most common cardiac rhythm disturbances causing morbidity and mortality. A causal link between the mutation and genesis of atrial fibrillation has not yet been directly demonstrated.  Increased I(Ks) arising from the KCNQ1 S140G mutation abbreviated atrial action potential duration (APD) and effective refractory period (ERP) and flattened APD and ERP restitution curves. It reduced atrial conduction velocity at low excitation rates, but increased it at high excitation rates that facilitated the conduction of high rate atrial excitation waves.  The mutation increased tissue susceptibility for initiation and maintenance of atrial arrhythmias.  The mutation stabilizes and accelerates re-entrant excitation waves, leading to rapid and sustained re-entry.  This study provides novel insights towards understanding the mechanisms underlying the pro-arrhythmic effects of the KCNQ1 S140G mutation.
-------------------------------------

10009735_234 - 0.756809190739 - science
[isolate, virulence, ld50, factor, mouse, day]

Cryptococcus neoformans var. grubii isolates recovered from persons with AIDS demonstrate a wide range of virulence during murine meningoencephalitis that correlates with the expression of certain virulence factors.
Cryptococcus neoformans is a common cause of meningoencephalitis among AIDS patients. Several C. neoformans virulence factors have been identified, but the relative importance of particular factors is unknown. This study examined the correlation of the virulence of 18 C. neoformans var. grubii isolates from AIDS patients with the expression of several well-described virulence factors. The LD50 at 15 days after intracranial inoculation of ICR mice was <100 c.f.u. for 22 % of isolates, 100-1000 for 28 %, 1000-10,000 for 11 % and >20,000 for 39 %. Higher cryptococcal concentrations in brains were noted for isolates with lower LD50 (P = 0.002). In survival studies, no immunocompetent BALB/c mice (nu/-) infected with 3 x LD50 of three virulent isolates (LD50 = 62, 99, 1280) survived beyond 23 days, whereas 100 %, 90 % and 90 % of mice infected with 20,000 c.f.u. of three hypovirulent isolates (LD50 > 20,000) survived for 60 days (P < 0.0001). Even among BALB/c nude (nu/nu) mice, survival rates over 60 days were 100 %, 70 % and 50 %, respectively, for the hypovirulent isolates. Growth rate at 37 degrees C and capsule size within brains correlated with LD50 by univariate (P = 0.0001 and 0.028, respectively) and multivariate (P = 0.017 and 0.016, respectively) analyses. There was no correlation between LD50 and capsule size in vitro, phospholipase activity, melanin formation, proteinase activity and fluconazole MIC. In conclusion, AIDS patients are susceptible to infection by C. neoformans isolates of wide-ranging virulence, including isolates that are markedly hypovirulent. The virulence of a given isolate reflects a composite of factors rather than the contribution of a dominant factor. Growth at 37 degrees C and capsule size in vivo make particularly important contributions.
-------------------------------------

10006824_234 - 0.706849767456 - science
[pulsar, modulation, energy, state]

The High Time Resolution Universe Pulsar Survey - V. Single-pulse energetics and modulation properties of 315 pulsars
We report on the pulse-to-pulse energy distributions and phase-resolved modulation properties for catalogued pulsars in the southern High Time Resolution Universe intermediate-latitude survey. We selected the 315 pulsars detected in a single-pulse search of this survey, allowing a large sample unbiased regarding any rotational parameters of neutron stars. We found that the energy distribution of many pulsars is well described by a log-normal distribution, with few deviating from a small range in log-normal scale and location parameters. Some pulsars exhibited multiple energy states corresponding to mode changes, and implying that some observed ???nulling??? may actually be a mode-change effect. PSR J1900-2600 was found to emit weakly in its previously identified ???null??? state. We found evidence for another state-change effect in two pulsars, which show bimodality in their nulling time-scales; that is, they switch between a continuous-emission state and a single-pulse-emitting state. Large modulation occurs in many pulsars across the full integrated profile, with increased sporadic bursts at leading and trailing sub-beam edges. Some of these high-energy outbursts may indicate the presence of ???giant pulse??? phenomena. We found no correlation with modulation and pulsar period, age or other parameters. Finally, the deviation of integrated pulse energy from its average value was generally quite small, despite the significant phase-resolved modulation in some pulsars; we interpret this as tenuous evidence of energy regulation between distinct pulsar sub-beams.
-------------------------------------

10018172_234 - 0.93155117756 - science
[biomarker, methane, sediment, bacterium, site, flux, archaeal, diffusive, archaea]

Biomarker indicators for anaerobic oxidizers of methane in brackish-marine sediments with diffusive methane fluxes
The anaerobic oxidation of methane (AOM) is a major methane sink in marine sediments and plays a crucial role in mitigating methane fluxes to the overlying water column. We investigated biomarker distributions and compound specific isotopic signatures in sediments from sites on the Northern European continental margin that are characterized by a diffusive flux of methane At all sites, the organic matter (OM) is predominantly derived from terrestrial higher plants, with subordinate abundances of algal biomarkers, but biomarkers for archaea and bacteria are also present. The co-occurrence of the archaeal lipids archaeol, sn-2-hydroxyarchaeol and 2,6,10,15,19-pentamethylicosane (PMI) with non-isoprenoidal glycerol diethers inferred to derive from sulfate-reducing bacteria (SRB) is similar to microbial biomarker assemblages observed at cold seeps. The archaeal and inferred SRB biomarker concentrations typically reach maxima close to the sulfate-methane transition zone (SMTZ), where archaeal biomarkers are depleted in C-13 The 16S rRNA gene sequences from the SMTZ of the Aarhus Bay sediment core indicate the occurrence of ANME-1 archaea, consistent with inferences derived from biomarker distributions The observations suggest that AOM in these diffusive settings is mediated by consortia of archaea and bacteria similar to those found at many seep and methane hydrate sites around the world. (C) 2009 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
-------------------------------------

10008168_234 - 0.760919950199 - science
[schizotypy, effect, study, biomarker, group, n-back, cognitive, amisulpride, memory, high]

A validation of cognitive biomarkers for the early identification of cognitive enhancing agents in schizotypy: a three-center double-blind placebo-controlled study.
A number of compounds aimed at improving cognition in schizophrenia have failed to demonstrate efficacy in Phase 2 clinical trials. Translational studies using biomarkers in surrogate populations, such as schizotypy, could be used to assess the efficacy of novel compounds. In this study, we aimed to validate the sensitivity and inter-site reliability of cognitive biomarkers (working memory (N-back), spatial working memory (SWM) and verbal fluency (VF) tasks) to detect the schizotypy phenotype and its reversal by psychotropic drugs. Healthy volunteers scoring high or average on a schizotypal personality measure (122 in each group) were randomized to receive a single dose of risperidone, amisulpride, nicotine or placebo in a double-blind, between-subject design. We found evidence for a poorer performance on N-back and VF tasks in the high schizotypy group, replicating previous research. This effect was counteracted by amisulpride on N-back: it improved working memory in high schizotypy group but impaired the controls. A similar pattern was seen in SWM and VF. We interpret this finding in the light of the dopamine enhancing action of amisulpride when given in low doses. In contrast, risperidone impaired both groups and nicotine had a beneficial effect for the low baseline performers only. These effects were consistent across sites. These data demonstrates the utility of biomarkers in detecting the effect of schizotypy and its reversal by drugs that enhance dopamine and cholinergic function. Studies using similar design could help the early assessment of potential of compounds designed to improve cognition in schizophrenia.
-------------------------------------

10005557_234 - 0.841196398931 - science
[aspergillus, sample, mycassay, tissue]

Detection of Aspergillus in lung and other tissue samples using the MycAssay Aspergillus real-time PCR kit.
The MycAssay™ Aspergillus real-time PCR kit was tested on tissues from patients with invasive fungal infections. Tissue samples from nine organ transplant recipients and 33 patients with haematological malignancy were from lung (n = 30), skin (n = 4), and others. Samples were preprocessed with proteinase K and lyticase, followed by DNA extraction and real-time PCR. For all samples, the sensitivity of the MycAssay Aspergillus test was 82% and specificity 79% relative to microscopy and 90% and 64%, respectively, compared with Aspergillus culture. The positive predictive value and negative predictive values compared with culture were 69% and 88% and were 88% and 69% compared with microscopy, respectively. The MycAssay Aspergillus test detected tissue invasive infections with Aspergillus fumigatus , Aspergillus flavus , and Aspergillus terreus.
-------------------------------------

10010349_234 - 0.749784021322 - science
[mutagenesis, rational, random, engineering]

The future of industrial antibiotic production: From random mutagenesis to synthetic biology
atural products derived from the secondary metabolism of microbes constitute a cornerstone of modern medicine. Engineering bugs to produce these products in high quantities is a major challenge for biotechnology, which has usually been tackled by either one of two strategies: iterative random mutagenesis or rational design. Recently, we analyzed the transcriptome of a Streptomyces clavuligerus strain optimized for production of the ??-lactamase inhibitor clavulanic acid by multiple rounds of mutagenesis and selection, and discovered that the observed changes matched surprisingly well with simple changes that have been introduced into these strains by rational engineering. Here, we discuss how in the new field of synthetic biology, random mutagenesis and rational engineering can be implemented complementarily in ways which may enable one to go beyond the status quo that has now been reached by each method independently. ?? 2011 Landes Bioscience.
-------------------------------------

10007445_234 - 0.801548198734 - science
[mkk4, map2k4, tumor, lung, kinase, cell, invasion, adenocarcinoma, suppressor, expression]

Map2k4 functions as a tumor suppressor in lung adenocarcinoma and inhibits tumor cell invasion by decreasing peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor γ2 expression.
MAP2K4 encodes a dual-specificity kinase (mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase 4, or MKK4) that is mutated in a variety of human malignancies, but the biochemical properties of the mutant kinases and their roles in tumorigenesis have not been fully elucidated. Here we showed that 8 out of 11 cancer-associated MAP2K4 mutations reduce MKK4 protein stability or impair its kinase activity. On the basis of findings from bioinformatic studies on human cancer cell lines with homozygous MAP2K4 loss, we posited that MKK4 functions as a tumor suppressor in lung adenocarcinomas that develop in mice owing to expression of mutant Kras and Tp53. Conditional Map2k4 inactivation in the bronchial epithelium of mice had no discernible effect alone but increased the multiplicity and accelerated the growth of incipient lung neoplasias induced by oncogenic Kras. MKK4 suppressed the invasion and metastasis of Kras-Tp53-mutant lung adenocarcinoma cells. MKK4 deficiency increased peroxisomal proliferator-activated receptor γ2 (PPARγ2) expression through noncanonical MKK4 substrates, and PPARγ2 enhanced tumor cell invasion. We conclude that Map2k4 functions as a tumor suppressor in lung adenocarcinoma and inhibits tumor cell invasion by decreasing PPARγ2 levels.
-------------------------------------

10018318_234 - 0.899622268402 - science
[immune, bacterial, innate, cd200r, mouse, influenza, infection, virus, cell, cd200]

Lowering the threshold of lung innate immune cell activation alters susceptibility to secondary bacterial superinfection.
BACKGROUND: Previous studies have shown that the interaction of CD200R, a myeloid inhibitory receptor, with its ligand, CD200, is critical in the control of innate immune activation in the lung. METHODS AND RESULTS: Using a mouse model of bacterial superinfection following influenza, we show that an absence of CD200R (a negative regulator highly expressed by macrophages and dendritic cells), restricts commensal and exogenous bacterial invasiveness and completely prevents the mortality observed in wild-type mice. This benefit is due to a heightened innate immune response to influenza virus in cd200r knockout mice that limits immune pathogenesis and viral load. In wild-type mice, apoptotic cells expressing CD200 that we believe contribute to the suppressed innate immune response to bacteria dominate during the resolution phase of influenza-induced inflammation. We also show for the first time the presence of a variety of previously unidentified bacterial species in the lower airways that are significantly adjusted by influenza virus infection and may contribute to the pathophysiology of disease. CONCLUSIONS: The interaction of CD200 with CD200R therefore contributes to the hyporesponsive innate immune state following influenza virus infection that predisposes to secondary bacterial infection, a phenomenon that has the potential for immune modulation.
-------------------------------------

10017179_234 - 0.878597011004 - science
[ketoconazole, yeast, ovale, phagocytosis, neutrophil, cell, intracellular, human]

Enhanced phagocytosis and intracellular killing of Pityrosporum ovale by human neutrophils after exposure to ketoconazole is correlated to changes of the yeast cell surface.
In seborrhoeic dermatitis an inflammatory response occurs secondary to large numbers of Pityrosporum yeasts appearing within and beneath the epidermis. To study the interaction between human neutrophils and P. ovale and any immunomodulating effect of antifungal agents, the yeast was exposed to ketoconazole and then incorporated into neutrophil monolayer assays. Phagocytosis was complement dependent and reached a maximum after 40 min. Ketoconazole at 25, 50 and 100 mg l-1 had no significant effect on phagocytosis of P. ovale. However, when yeast cells were pretreated with ketoconazole for 2 h before exposure to the phagocyte monolayer there was a significant enhancement of phagocytosis with increasing drug concentration. Intracellular killing of P. ovale was assessed by methylene blue dye exclusion. In the absence of ketoconazole, 5% of intracellular yeast cells were killed following internalization for 2 h. Pretreatment of yeast cells with ketoconazole at 10 and 100 mg l-1 for 2 h prior to ingestion significantly increased intracellular killing to a maximum of 23%. This study demonstrates that yeast cells of P. ovale are readily ingested by human neutrophils by a complement dependent process. Phagocytosis is enhanced if the organism is exposed to ketoconazole before opsonisation and ingestion. The inability of neutrophils to kill P. ovale is modulated in the presence of therapeutic concentrations of ketoconazole.
-------------------------------------

10017136_234 - 0.83172952434 - science
[mycn, expression, protein, gene, model, level, max]

Investigation of system properties related to MYCN oncogene expression in neuroblastoma
Neuroblastoma (NB) is one the most common cancers in infancy and childhood, andpossession of amplified MYCN gene sequence (gene locus 2p24) is related toaggressive disease and poor prognosis, with a clear distinction established regardingthe survival of patients based on the gene copy-number of MYCN. However, theexpression of MYCN has been reported to vary between patients of even the sameNB subgroups and more importantly its significance in relation to NB prognosis isstill not clearly established with various reports presenting contradicting results.In this study, a bottom-up Systems Biology approach is suggested for studying boththe significance of MYCN expression, but also the distribution of control in therelated pathways that regulate this expression. An initial model was constructeddescribing the basic steps in MYCN expression and it was parameterised with valuesobtained from the literature. The results from the model simulations and analysisgenerated the hypothesis that the expression of MYCN cannot be used exclusively asa predictive factor without taking into account the relative levels of its dimerisationpartner, the protein MAX. Additionally, it was predicted that the amplification ofMYCN had a more pronounced relative effect at lower rather than at higher MYCNgene copy numbers.In order to create separate models for 4 NB cell-lines, it was necessary to performabsolute measurements for MYCN at the DNA, mRNA and protein level, as well asfor the MAX protein. The MYCN gene copy numbers were measured using theqPCR method, while a new data analysis method was suggested for performingabsolute quantification with the use of house-keeping genes, appropriate statisticalmethods and no reference samples. The relative amounts of MYCN mRNA werealso measured using qPCR and the results obtained were in agreement with thesuggested levels from the literature.The absolute measurement of the N-Myc and MAX proteins was attempted usingtwo complementary methods, western blots and ELISA. A series of optimisationexperiments and data analysis steps were taken that resulted in the refinement of theexperimental conditions to the point where they can be used for successfulquantification of the absolute levels of the N-Myc protein. Alternatively, theprocedure used for the MAX protein proved problematic and was not as successful.Overall, this study was successful in becoming the first step for an expanded bottomupsystems biology study regarding the significance of MYCN expression in NB.The combination of both the modelling and experimental parts of this workillustrated some of the potential benefits of Systems Biology approaches in studyingdisease. In this case the resulting model, once fully parameterised with experimentaldata, can be expanded in a number of suggested ways that address questions like therole and control of MYCN expression in relation to the cell-cycle deregulation ormulti-drug resistance in NB, giving in the process a better understanding regardingsuitable treatment targets for individual NB cases.
-------------------------------------

10005285_234 - 0.930437635377 - science
[tendon, adhesion, cell, formation]

Tendon is covered by a basement membrane epithelium that is required for cell retention and the prevention of adhesion formation.
The ability of tendons to glide smoothly during muscle contraction is impaired after injury by fibrous adhesions that form between the damaged tendon surface and surrounding tissues. To understand how adhesions form we incubated excised tendons in fibrin gels (to mimic the homeostatic environment at the injury site) and assessed cell migration. We noticed cells exiting the tendon from only the cut ends. Furthermore, treatment of the tendon with trypsin resulted in cell extravagation from the shaft of the tendons. Electron microscopy and immunolocalisation studies showed that the tendons are covered by a novel cell layer in which a collagen type IV/laminin basement membrane (BM) overlies a keratinised epithelium. PCR and western blot analyses confirmed the expression of laminin β1 in surface cells, only. To evaluate the cell retentive properties of the BM in vivo we examined the tendons of the Col4a1(+/Svc) mouse that is heterozygous for a G-to-A transition in the Col4a1 gene that produces a G1064D substitution in the α1(IV) chain of collagen IV. The flexor tendons had a discontinuous BM, developed fibrous adhesions with overlying tissues, and were acellular at sites of adhesion formation. In further experiments, tenotomy of wild-type mice resulted in expression of laminin throughout the adhesion. In conclusion, we show the existence of a novel tendon BM-epithelium that is required to prevent adhesion formation. The Col4a1(+/Svc) mouse is an effective animal model for studying adhesion formation because of the presence of a structurally-defective collagen type IV-containing BM.
-------------------------------------

10011644_234 - 0.887661960723 - science
[trypanosome, silicon, model]

The silicon trypanosome
African trypanosomes have emerged as promising unicellular model organisms for the next generation of systems biology. They offer unique advantages, due to their relative simplicity, the availability of all standard genomics techniques and a long history of quantitative research. Reproducible cultivation methods exist for morphologically and physiologically distinct life-cycle stages. The genome has been sequenced, and microarrays, RNA-interference and high-accuracy metabolomics are available. Furthermore, the availability of extensive kinetic data on all glycolytic enzymes has led to the early development of a complete, experiment-based dynamic model of an important biochemical pathway. Here we describe the achievements of trypanosome systems biology so far and outline the necessary steps towards the ambitious aim of creating a Silicon Trypanosome, a comprehensive, experiment-based, multi-scale mathematical model of trypanosome physiology. We expect that, in the long run, the quantitative modelling enabled by the Silicon Trypanosome will play a key role in selecting the most suitable targets for developing new anti-parasite drugs. Copyright ?? 2010 Cambridge University Press.
-------------------------------------

10010334_234 - 0.967249780523 - science
[biology, synthetic]

A turning point for natural product discovery-ESF-EMBO research conference: synthetic biology of antibiotic production.
Synthetic Biology is in a critical phase of its development: it has finally reached the point where it can move from proof-of-principle studies to real-world applications. Secondary metabolite biosynthesis, especially the discovery and production of antibiotics, is a particularly relevant target area for such applications of synthetic biology. The first international conference to explore this subject was held in Spain in October 2011. In four sessions on General Synthetic Biology, Filamentous Fungal Systems, Actinomyces Systems, and Tools and Host Structures, scientists presented the most recent technological and scientific advances, and a final-day Forward Look Plenary Discussion identified future trends in the field. ?? 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
-------------------------------------

10011142_234 - 0.840594476908 - science
[modelling, reliability, biomarker, mathematical, glutathione, metabolism, cited, times, approach]

A mathematical modelling approach to assessing the reliability of biomarkers of glutathione metabolism
Times Cited: 6
-------------------------------------

10009820_234 - 0.929026062721 - science
[cilofungin, neutrophil, phagocytosis, candida, albican, pretreatment, blastospore, complement]

Stimulation of human neutrophil phagocytosis of Candida albicans by a beta-glucan synthase inhibitor, cilofungin.
The effect of a lipopeptide antifungal agent, cilofungin, on serum opsonization and phagocytosis of Candida albicans yeast phase cells in human neutrophil monolayer assays was investigated. Simultaneous addition of fungicidal concentrations of cilofungin did not enhance or inhibit phagocytosis of C. albicans. Pretreatment of Candida blastospores with cilofungin in the absence of serum complement for 1 h did not affect phagocytosis. However, pretreatment of blastospores with cilofungin and complement promoted a significant increase in ingestion. Pretreatment of neutrophils with cilofungin in serum-free media did not affect neutrophil viability. In contrast, pre-exposure of neutrophils to cilofungin in the presence of complement inhibited ingestion of blastospores.
-------------------------------------

10003269_234 - 0.940877524697 - science
[fibroblast, collagen, keloid, expression, dw, type, skin, normal, effect]

A novel in vitro assay for electrophysiological research on human skin fibroblasts: degenerate electrical waves downregulate collagen I expression in keloid fibroblasts.
Electrical stimulation (ES) has been used for the treatment of wounds and has been shown to alter gene expression and protein synthesis in skin fibroblasts in vitro. Here, we have developed a new in vitro model system for testing the effects of precisely defined, different types of ES on the collagen expression of normal and keloid human skin fibroblasts. Keloid fibroblasts were studied because they show excessive collagen production. Both types of fibroblasts were electrically stimulated with alternating current (AC), direct current (DC) or degenerate waves (DW). Cells were subjected to 20, 75 and 150mV/mm electric field strengths at 10 and 60Hz frequencies. At lower electric fields, all types of ES upregulated collagen I in both cell types compared to controls. However, at higher electric field strength (150mV/mm) and frequency (60Hz), DW maximally downregulated collagen I in keloid fibroblasts, yet had significantly lower cytotoxic effects on normal fibroblasts than AC and DC. Compared to unstimulated cells, both normal skin and keloid fibroblasts showed a significant decrease in collagen I expression after 12h of DW and AC stimulation. In contrast, increasing amplitude of DC upregulated collagen I and PAI-1 gene transcription in normal and keloid fibroblasts, along with increased cytotoxicity effects. Thus, our new preclinical assay system shows highly differential effects of specific types of ES on human fibroblast collagen expression and cytotoxicity and identifies DW of electrical current (DW) as a promising, novel therapeutic strategy for suppressing excessive collagen I formation in keloid disease.
-------------------------------------

10003482_234 - 0.758034853084 - science
[shot, microtubule, spectraplakin, protein, function, axonal, growth, tip, eb1, loss]

Spectraplakins promote microtubule-mediated axonal growth by functioning as structural microtubule-associated proteins and EB1-dependent +TIPs (tip interacting proteins).
The correct outgrowth of axons is essential for the development and regeneration of nervous systems. Axon growth is primarily driven by microtubules. Key regulators of microtubules in this context are the spectraplakins, a family of evolutionarily conserved actin-microtubule linkers. Loss of function of the mouse spectraplakin ACF7 or of its close Drosophila homolog Short stop/Shot similarly cause severe axon shortening and microtubule disorganization. How spectraplakins perform these functions is not known. Here we show that axonal growth-promoting roles of Shot require interaction with EB1 (End binding protein) at polymerizing plus ends of microtubules. We show that binding of Shot to EB1 requires SxIP motifs in Shot's C-terminal tail (Ctail), mutations of these motifs abolish Shot functions in axonal growth, loss of EB1 function phenocopies Shot loss, and genetic interaction studies reveal strong functional links between Shot and EB1 in axonal growth and microtubule organization. In addition, we report that Shot localizes along microtubule shafts and stabilizes them against pharmacologically induced depolymerization. This function is EB1-independent but requires net positive charges within Ctail which essentially contribute to the microtubule shaft association of Shot. Therefore, spectraplakins are true members of two important classes of neuronal microtubule regulating proteins: +TIPs (tip interacting proteins; plus end regulators) and structural MAPs (microtubule-associated proteins). From our data we deduce a model that relates the different features of the spectraplakin C terminus to the two functions of Shot during axonal growth.
-------------------------------------

10008983_234 - 0.703775067777 - science
[theory, stat, eft, compton, chiral, proton]

Using EFT to analyze low-energy Compton scattering from protons and  light nuclei
We discuss the application of an effective field theory (EFT) whichincorporates the chiral symmetry of QCD to Compton scattering from the protonand deuteron. We describe the chiral EFT analysis of the proton Comptonscattering database presented in our recent review (arXiv:1203.6834), whichgives: alpha^{(p)}=10.5 +/- 0.5(stat) +/- 0.8(theory); beta^{(p)}= 2.7 +/-0.5(stat) +/- 0.8(theory), for the electric and magnetic dipole polarizabilityof the proton. We also summarize the chiral EFT analysis of the world data oncoherent Compton scattering from deuterium presented in arXiv:1203.6834. Thatyields: alpha^{(s)}=10.5 +/- 2.0(stat) +/- 0.8(theory); beta^{(s)}=3.6 +/-1.0(stat) +/- 0.8(theory).
-------------------------------------

10009707_234 - 0.834738056853 - science
[resistance, aspergillosis, azole, number]

Azole antifungal resistance today: focus on Aspergillus.
Oral triazole therapy is well established for the treatment of invasive aspergillosis (IPA), allergic aspergillosis (ABPA), and chronic pulmonary aspergillosis (CPA), and is often long-term. Resistance to triazole azole antifungal drugs in Aspergillus fumigatus is now a major clinical problem in a number of European locations, in China, Canada and the USA with particularly high frequencies from the north-west of the UK, and The Netherlands. A number of centers are reporting the continuing increasing frequency and evolution of resistance mechanisms in A. fumigatus, in both azole-naïve and patients treated with azoles. The increasing rate of resistance is of concern. A number of resistance mechanisms have been found. The biofilm modality of Aspergillus growth may have a number of therapeutic implications for aspergillosis, including antifungal resistance. Microbiological diagnosis of aspergillosis is limited by poor culture yield, leading to uncertainty about the frequency of triazole resistance. Direct resistance testing in culture-negative clinical samples may add additional insights into the prevalence of azole resistance in A. fumigatus.
-------------------------------------

10018546_234 - 0.70177768601 - science
[characterisation, superalloy, stress, machined, high, residual, preuss, surface, axinte, nickel-base]

Characterisation of residual stresses in machined surfaces of a high strength nickel-base superalloy
Li, W. Preuss, M. Withers, P. J. Axinte, D. Andrews, P.
-------------------------------------

10008019_234 - 0.761836516393 - science
[times, piezoelectricity, wurtzite, vol, second-order, cited, iii-n, semiconductor]

Second-order piezoelectricity in wurtzite III-N semiconductors (vol 84, 085211, 2011)
Times Cited: 0
-------------------------------------

10003282_234 - 0.889050366976 - science
[pacap, human, skin, cell, vascular, vpac1r, response, concentration-dependent, dermal]

Pituitary adenylate cyclase activating polypeptide: an important vascular regulator in human skin in vivo.
Pituitary adenylate cyclase-activating peptide (PACAP) is an important neuropeptide and immunomodulator in various tissues. Although this peptide and its receptors (ie, VPAC1R, VPAC2R, and PAC1R) are expressed in human skin, their biological roles are unknown. Therefore, we tested whether PACAP regulates vascular responses in human skin in vivo. When injected intravenously, PACAP induced a significant, concentration-dependent vascular response (ie, flush, erythema, edema) and mediated a significant and concentration-dependent increase in intrarectal body temperature that peaked at 2.7°C. Topical application of PACAP induced marked concentration-dependent edema. Immunohistochemistry revealed a close association of PACAP-immunoreactive nerve fibers with mast cells and dermal blood vessels. VPAC1R was expressed by dermal endothelial cells, CD4+ and CD8+ T cells, mast cells, and keratinocytes, whereas VPAC2R was expressed only in keratinocytes. VPAC1R protein and mRNA were also detected in human dermal microvascular endothelial cells. The PACAP-induced change in cAMP production in these cells demonstrated VPAC1R to be functional. PACAP treatment of organ-cultured human skin strongly increased the number of CD31+ vessel cross-sections. Taken together, these results suggest that PACAP directly induces vascular responses that may be associated with neurogenic inflammation, indicating for the first time that PACAP may be a crucial vascular regulator in human skin in vivo. Antagonists to PACAP function may be beneficial for the treatment of inflammatory skin diseases with a neurogenic component.
-------------------------------------

10018315_234 - 0.749006828885 - science
[proinflammatory, viral, il-17, virus, infection, expression, antiviral]

IL-17 boosts proinflammatory outcome of antiviral response in human cells.
Excessive inflammation during bacterial and viral infections is destructive to the host and involves elevated production of proinflammatory cytokines. It is especially deleterious in organs with space constraints such as lung and the CNS. Indeed, a number of viruses that infect lungs, such as avian influenza virus, SARS-associated coronavirus, and respiratory syncytial virus, elicit a very high level of proinflammatory cytokines; however, it is unclear what triggers their production. In this study, we show that IL-17 commonly produced during viral infection specifically augments a proinflammatory response by directly synergizing with antiviral signaling. Costimulation of primary human fibroblasts with IL-17 greatly enhanced respiratory syncytial virus-induced or synthetic dsRNA-based viral mimic polyinosinic:polycytidylic acid-induced expression of proinflammatory genes without affecting expression of IFN-β-stimulated or IFN-stimulated genes. Knockdown of expression of known mediators of the antiviral signaling pathway revealed that the IL-17-poly(I:C) synergy depends on the presence of the transcriptional factors RelA and IFN regulatory factor 3 and IκB kinases. Moreover, this synergy was blocked by an IκB kinase inhibitor, BAY 11-7082. These findings shed light on the molecular mechanisms behind IL-17-dependent immunopathology observed in viral infections.
-------------------------------------

10003266_234 - 0.711456841435 - science
[hair, rac1, mouse, rescue]

A function for Rac1 in the terminal differentiation and pigmentation of hair.
The small GTPase Rac1 is ubiquitously expressed in proliferating and differentiating layers of the epidermis and hair follicles. Previously, Rac1 was shown to regulate stem cell behaviour in these compartments. We have asked whether Rac1 has, in addition, a specific, stem-cell-independent function in the regulation of terminal hair follicle differentiation. To address this, we have expressed a constitutively active mutant of Rac1, L61Rac1, only in the basal epidermal layer and outer root sheath of mice possessing an epidermis-specific deletion of endogenous Rac1, which experience severe hair loss. The resulting 'rescue' mice exhibited a hair coat throughout their lives. Therefore, expression of Rac1 activity in the keratin-14-positive compartment of the skin is sufficient for the formation of hair follicles and hair in normal quantities. The quality of hair formed in rescue mice was, however, not normal. Rescue mice showed a grey, dull hair coat, whereas that of wild-type and L61Rac1-transgenic mice was black and shiny. Hair analysis in rescue mice revealed altered structures of the hair shaft and the cuticle and disturbed organization of medulla cells and pigment distribution. Disorganization of medulla cells correlates with the absence of cortical, keratin-filled spikes that normally protrude from the cortex into the medulla. The desmosomal cadherin Dsc2, which normally decorates these protrusions, was found to be reduced or absent in the hair of rescue mice. Our study demonstrates regulatory functions for Rac1 in the formation of hair structure and pigmentation and thereby identifies, for the first time, a role for Rac1 in terminal differentiation.
-------------------------------------

10010307_234 - 0.787373392505 - science
[phylogeny, streptomyce, species, tree, genome-based, phylogenetic, relative, robust, method]

Genome-based phylogenetic analysis of Streptomyces and its relatives
Motivation: Streptomyces is one of the best-studied genera of the order Actinomycetales due to its great importance in medical science, ecology and the biotechnology industry. A comprehensive, detailed and robust phylogeny of Streptomyces and its relatives is needed for understanding how this group emerged and maintained such a vast diversity throughout evolution and how soil-living mycelial forms (e.g., Streptomyces s. str.) are related to parasitic, unicellular pathogens (e.g., Mycobacterium tuberculosis) or marine species (e.g., Salinispora tropica). The most important application area of such a phylogenetic analysis will be in the comparative re-annotation of genome sequences and the reconstruction of Streptomyces metabolic networks for biotechnology. Methods: Classical 16S-rRNA-based phylogenetic reconstruction does not guarantee to produce well-resolved robust trees that reflect the overall relationship between bacterial species with widespread horizontal gene transfer. In our study we therefore combine three whole genome-based phylogenies with eight different, highly informative single-gene phylogenies to determine a new robust consensus tree of 45 Actinomycetales species with completely sequenced genomes. Results: None of the individual methods achieved a resolved phylogeny of Streptomyces and its relatives. Single-gene approaches failed to yield a detailed phylogeny; even though the single trees are in good agreement among each other, they show very low resolution of inner branches. The three whole genome-based methods improve resolution considerably. Only by combining the phylogenies from single gene-based and genome-based approaches we finally obtained a consensus tree with well-resolved branches for the entire set of Actinomycetales species. This phylogenetic information is stable and informative enough for application to the system-wide comparative modeling of bacterial physiology. ?? 2009 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
-------------------------------------

10002071_234 - 0.80034376056 - science
[parcellation, functional, cortical, human, structural, tractography, diffusion, cortex, region, method]

Connectivity-based structural and functional parcellation of the human cortex using diffusion imaging and tractography
The parcellation of the cortex via its anatomical properties has been an important research endeavor for over a century. To date, however, a universally accepted parcellation scheme for the human brain still remains elusive. In the current review, we explore the use of in vivo diffusion imaging and white matter tractography as a non-invasive method for the structural and functional parcellation of the human cerebral cortex, discussing the strengths and limitations of the current approaches. Cortical parcellation via white matter connectivity is based on the premise that, as connectional anatomy determines functional organization, it should be possible to segregate functionally-distinct cortical regions by identifying similarities and differences in connectivity profiles. Recent studies have provided initial evidence in support of the efficacy of this connectional parcellation methodology. Such investigations have identified distinct cortical subregions which correlate strongly with functional regions identified via fMRI and meta-analyses. Furthermore, a strong parallel between the cortical regions defined via tractographic and more traditional cytoarchitectonic parcellation methods has been observed. However, the degree of correspondence and relative functional importance of cytoarchitectonic- versus connectivity-derived parcellations still remains unclear. Diffusion tractography remains one of the only methods capable of visualizing the structural networks of the brain in vivo. As such, it is of vital importance to continue to improve the accuracy of the methodology and to extend its potential applications in the study of cognition in neurological health and disease.
-------------------------------------

10010323_234 - 0.939407958684 - science
[synthetic, secondary, metabolomic, metabolism, metabolic, compound]

Metabolomics methods for the synthetic biology of secondary metabolism
Many microbial secondary metabolites are of high biotechnological value for medicine, agriculture, and the food industry. Bacterial genome mining has revealed numerous novel secondary metabolite biosynthetic gene clusters, which encode the potential to synthesize a large diversity of compounds that have never been observed before. The stimulation or "awakening" of this cryptic microbial secondary metabolism has naturally attracted the attention of synthetic microbiologists, who exploit recent advances in DNA sequencing and synthesis to achieve unprecedented control over metabolic pathways. One of the indispensable tools in the synthetic biology toolbox is metabolomics, the global quantification of small biomolecules. This review illustrates the pivotal role of metabolomics for the synthetic microbiology of secondary metabolism, including its crucial role in novel compound discovery in microbes, the examination of side products of engineered metabolic pathways, as well as the identification of major bottlenecks for the overproduction of compounds of interest, especially in combination with metabolic modeling. We conclude by highlighting remaining challenges and recent technological advances that will drive metabolomics towards fulfilling its potential as a cornerstone technology of synthetic microbiology. ?? 2012 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
-------------------------------------

10003460_234 - 0.845676922271 - science
[exchanger, cytosol, receptor, excitability, er, mitochondrial, astrocyte, extracellular, plasmalemmal, membrane]

Calcium signalling in astroglia.
Astroglia possess excitability based on movements of Ca(2+) ions between intracellular compartments and plasmalemmal Ca(2+) fluxes. This "Ca(2+) excitability" is controlled by several families of proteins located in the plasma membrane, within the cytosol and in the intracellular organelles, most notably in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and mitochondria. Accumulation of cytosolic Ca(2+) can be caused by the entry of Ca(2+) from the extracellular space through ionotropic receptors and store-operated channels expressed in astrocytes. Plasmalemmal Ca(2+) ATP-ase and sodium-calcium exchanger extrude cytosolic Ca(2+) to the extracellular space; the exchanger can also operate in reverse, depending of the intercellular Na(+) concentration, to deliver Ca(2+) to the cytosol. The ER internal store possesses inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptors which can be activated upon stimulation of astrocytes through a multiple plasma membrane metabotropic G-protein coupled receptors. This leads to release of Ca(2+) from the ER and its elevation in the cytosol, the level of which can be modulated by mitochondria. The mitochondrial uniporter takes up Ca(2+) into the matrix, while free Ca(2+) exits the matrix through the mitochondrial Na(+)/Ca(2+) exchanger as well as via transient openings of the mitochondrial permeability transition pore. One of the prominent consequences of astroglial Ca(2+) excitability is gliotransmission, a release of transmitters from astroglia which can lead to signalling to adjacent neurones.
-------------------------------------

10011712_234 - 0.782519268815 - science
[dicer, mirna, cytotrophoblast, proliferation]

Dicer-dependent miRNAs provide an endogenous restraint on cytotrophoblast proliferation.
Mature microRNAs (miRNAs) are processed from non-functional (pre)-miRNAs by the enzyme Dicer. In this study, manipulation of Dicer level was used to explore the influence of miRNAs on cytotrophoblast proliferation in human placenta. Immunohistochemistry (IHC) showed Dicer in cytotrophoblast, but not in terminally differentiated syncytiotrophoblast. siRNA-mediated knockdown of Dicer was used to effect a global reduction in miRNA in first trimester placental explants, as a result of which cytotrophoblast proliferation was significantly enhanced. QPCR and IHC analysis following Dicer knockdown revealed that the expression of two nodal pro-mitogenic signalling molecules expressed within cytotrophoblast, ERK and SHP-2, was significantly enhanced. Studies are now required to identify individual miRNAs involved in regulating trophoblast proliferation.
-------------------------------------

10009584_234 - 0.762704066025 - science
[melanoma, cell, pde5a, braf, increase, downregulation, invasion, oncogenic]

Oncogenic BRAF Induces Melanoma Cell Invasion by Downregulating the cGMP-Specific Phosphodiesterase PDE5A
We show that in melanoma cells oncogenic BRAF, acting through MEK and the transcription factor BRN2, downregulates the cGMP-specific phosphodiesterase PDE5A. Although PDE5A downregulation causes a small decrease in proliferation, its major impact is to stimulate a dramatic increase in melanoma cell invasion. This is because PDE5A downregulation leads to an increase in cGMP, which induces an increase in cytosolic Ca(2+), stimulating increased contractility and inducing invasion. PDE5A downregulation also this leads to an increase in short-term and long-term colonization of the lungs by melanoma cells. We do not observe this pathway in NRAS mutant melanoma or BRAF mutant colorectal cells. Thus, we show that in melanoma cells oncogenic BRAF induces invasion through downregulation of PDE5A.
-------------------------------------

10007491_234 - 0.845651522758 - science
[plasma, analysis, serum, metabolomic, clinical, patient, sclc, difference]

Is serum or plasma more appropriate for intersubject comparisons in metabolomic studies? An assessment in patients with small-cell lung cancer.
In clinical analyses, the most appropriate biofluid should be analyzed for optimal assay performance. For biological fluids, the most readily accessible is blood, and metabolomic analyses can be performed either on plasma or serum. To determine the optimal agent for analysis, metabolic profiles of matched human serum and plasma were assessed by gas chromatography/time-of-flight mass spectrometry and ultrahigh-performance liquid chromatography mass spectrometry (in positive and negative electrospray ionization modes). Comparison of the two metabolomes, in terms of reproducibility, discriminative ability and coverage, indicated that they offered similar analytical opportunities. An analysis of the variation between 29 small-cell lung cancer (SCLC) patients revealed that the differences between individuals are markedly similar for the two biofluids. However, significant differences between the levels of some specific metabolites were identified, as were differences in the intersubject variability of some metabolite levels. Glycerophosphocholines, erythritol, creatinine, hexadecanoic acid, and glutamine in plasma, but not in serum, were shown to correlate with life expectancy for SCLC patients, indicating the utility of metabolomic analyses in clinical prognosis and the particular utility of plasma in relation to the clinical management of SCLC.
-------------------------------------

10018378_234 - 0.836305999887 - science
[irf5, macrophage, expression, gene, polarization]

IRF5 promotes inflammatory macrophage polarization and TH1-TH17 responses
Polymorphisms in the gene encoding the transcription factor IRF5 that lead to higher mRNA expression are associated with many autoimmune diseases. Here we show that IRF5 expression in macrophages was reversibly induced by inflammatory stimuli and contributed to the plasticity of macrophage polarization. High expression of IRF5 was characteristic of M1 macrophages, in which it directly activated transcription of the genes encoding interleukin 12 subunit p40 (IL-12p40), IL-12p35 and IL-23p19 and repressed the gene encoding IL-10. Consequently, those macrophages set up the environment for a potent T helper type 1 (T(H)1)-T(H)17 response. Global gene expression analysis demonstrated that exogenous IRF5 upregulated or downregulated expression of established phenotypic markers of M1 or M2 macrophages, respectively. Our data suggest a critical role for IRF5 in M1 macrophage polarization and define a previously unknown function for IRF5 as a transcriptional repressor.
-------------------------------------

10002039_234 - 0.848196748593 - science
[liposomal, pharmacokinetic, amphotericin, regimen, intermittent, conventional, linear, cohort, time, design]

Population pharmacokinetics of conventional and intermittent dosing of liposomal amphotericin B in adults: a first critical step for rational design of innovative regimens.
There is increased interest in intermittent regimen of liposomal amphotericin B, which may facilitate use in ambulatory settings. Little is known, however, about the most appropriate dosage and schedule of administration. Plasma pharmacokinetic data were acquired from 30 patients receiving liposomal amphotericin B for empirical treatment of suspected invasive fungal infection. Two cohorts were studied. The first cohort received 3 mg of liposomal amphotericin B/kg of body weight/day; the second cohort received 10 mg of liposomal amphotericin B/kg at time zero, followed by 5 mg/kg at 48 and 120 h. The levels of liposomal amphotericin B were measured by high-pressure liquid chromatography (HPLC). The pharmacokinetics were estimated by using a population methodology. Monte Carlo simulations were performed. D-optimal design was used to identify maximally informative sampling times for both conventional and intermittent regimens for future studies. A three-compartment pharmacokinetic model best described the data. The pharmacokinetics for both conventional and intermittent dosing were linear. The estimates for the mean (standard deviation) for clearance and the volume of the central compartment were 1.60 (0.85) liter/h and 20.61 (15.27) liters, respectively. Monte Carlo simulations demonstrated considerable variability in drug exposure. Bayesian estimates for clearance and volume increased in a linear manner with weight, but only the former was statistically significant (P = 0.039). D-optimal design provided maximally informative sampling times for future pharmacokinetic studies. The pharmacokinetics of a conventional and an intermittently administered high-dose regimen liposomal amphotericin B are linear. Further pharmacokinetic-pharmacodynamic preclinical and clinical studies are required to identify safe and effective intermittent regimens.
-------------------------------------

10017007_234 - 0.70133442092 - science
[algorithm, genetic, gas, solution, multiple, case]

Applying Genetic Algorithms to Optimize the Cost of Multiple Sourcing Supply Chain Systems – An Industry Case Study
This chapter is to present a successful industry case applying Genetic Algorithms (GAs). The case has applied GAs for the purpose of optimizing the total cost of a multiple sourcing supply chain system. The system is characterized by a multiple sourcing model with stochastic demand. A mathematical model is adopted to describe the stochastic inventory with the many-to-many demandsupplier network problem and it simultaneously constitutes the inventory control and transportation parameters as well as price uncertainty factors. Genetic Algorithms are applied to derive optimal solutions through the optimization process. A numerical example and its solution demonstrate the detail solution procedure based on Genetic Algorithms and shows that GAs are able to solve such a di.cult problem e.ciently and easily. Further research is also discussed.
-------------------------------------

10013643_234 - 0.898860799561 - science
[peptide, cell, concentration, membrane, study]

Quantification of Cell Penetrating Peptide Uptake By Fluorescent Techniques
Cell penetrating peptides have been the focus of drug delivery research for 15 years due to their apparent ability to deliver cargoes inside cells more readily than many other carriers. Using two of the most commonly studied peptides (tat47-57 and R9), the present study differs from previous work by deliberately choosing to observe uptake with lower peptide concentrations closer to potential therapeutic doses, and by implementing raster image correlation spectroscopy (RICS) on a commercial microscope to quantify uptake in parallel to other techniques such as fluorescence correlation spectroscopy (FCS), confocal microscopy, and mass spectroscopy.An initial study using mass spectrometry and ExPASy (Expert Protein Analysis System) revealed that the peptides are stable for at least one hour in PBS. Based on this initial information and other experimental conditions, the study took two main directions with regards to the peptide: the membrane interaction and accumulation in the cell.The peptides interaction with the cell membrane revealed that neither tat-TAMRA nor R9-TAMRA disrupts the membrane of cells: incorporation of FM2-10 in the membrane was not modified in K562 cells whilst it was in presence of the control lytic peptides GALA and mellitin. Based on this information confocal microscopy was utilised to assess the localisation on the cell membrane. Peptide binding to the membrane appeared to be heterogeneous in distribution at 1µM bulk concentration.Accumulation in cells of the peptides was observed incubated at 37°C, confocal microscopy showed punctuated distribution with intracellular aggregations of fluorescence measuring between 2.5-3.5µm in diameter. Co-staining with a nuclear dye revealed these aggregations to be focused around the nucleus of the cell. Initial FCS experiments indicated a concentration dependent accumulation of the peptide in the cells and a decrease of the intracellular diffusion coefficients at high concentration possibly corresponding with molecular crowding. Interestingly the anomalous diffusion model did not statistically improve the results.RICS was implemented to study the kinetics of entry of TAMRA labelled cell penetrating peptides in both Caco-2 and HeLa cells lines at concentrations between 500nM and 2µM. Concentrations above 1µM exhibited higher final intracellular concentrations, yet the measured diffusion coefficients were similarly independent of extracellular concentration. Both peptides appeared to enter the cell quickly with a fast initial uptake over the first 10 minutes, reaching a concentration maxima after 30 minutes.Overall, the study reveals that many published studies may be incorrect as they may only be reporting the presence of a fluorescent dye inside the cell not the peptide. The fast binding of the peptide to the membrane is likely to cause false positive results when traditionally studying internalisation kinetics such as using flow cytometry and confocal microscopy. Correlation spectroscopy techniques such as FCS, provide useful information on internalisation of the peptides, but the single spot measurement is limited when providing information on the entire cell. RICS is a progression of correlation spectroscopy and provides a more representative picture of the cell.
-------------------------------------

10018297_234 - 0.904218245489 - science
[cell, inflammation, immune, molecule, costimulatory, specific, late]

Is it wise to target the late costimulatory molecule OX40 as a therapeutic target?
The immune response triggered following pathogen recognition, though required to clear the infection, can be detrimental if it is produced in excess or fails to resolve promptly. Excessive inflammation contributes to infectious and noninfectious pathologies in the gut (such as inflammatory bowel disease), lung (such as bronchiolitis), and in a variety of autoimmune conditions. T cells contribute significantly to pathology during inflammation. Global anti-inflammatory strategies can alleviate the consequences of exuberant inflammation by suppressing T cell activity, but may leave the patient vulnerable to opportunistic infection. More specific therapies aim to suppress only those T cells involved in the disease process, and one such approach is to target late costimulatory molecules. These are not expressed on naïve or resting memory cells. Rather, they have a specific window of expression and their ligation results in the production of abundant inflammatory cytokines. By targeting these molecules, it is hoped that inflammation will reduce, but that therapies will be specific enough to avoid, global immune suppression. This review focuses on the late costimulatory molecule OX40, compare it with other T cell costimulators, and highlight why it is a more suitable target for immune intervention than other immune suppressive strategies.
-------------------------------------

10012761_234 - 0.734098031949 - science
[leptin, crp, level, adiposity, measure, resistance, subject]

Epidemiological evidence against a role for C-reactive protein causing leptin resistance.
OBJECTIVE: It has been suggested that elevated levels of C-reactive protein (CRP) might interfere with leptin signalling and contribute to leptin resistance. Our aim was to assess whether plasma levels of CRP influence leptin resistance in humans; and our hypothesis was that CRP levels would modify the cross-sectional relationships between leptin and measures of adiposity. DESIGN AND METHODS: We assessed 4 measures of adiposity: body mass index, waist circumference, fat mass, and % body fat in 2113 British Regional Heart Study (BRHS) men (mean (SD) age 69 (5) years), with replication in 760 (age 69 (6) years) European Male Aging Study (EMAS) subjects. RESULTS: In BRHS subjects leptin correlated with CRP (Spearman's r=0.22, p<0.0001). Leptin and CRP correlated with all 4 measures of adiposity (r-value range: 0.22 to 0.57, all p<0.0001). Age-adjusted mean levels for adiposity measures increased in relation to leptin levels; but CRP level did not consistently influence the β coefficients of the regression lines in a CRP-stratified analysis. In BRHS subjects, the BMI vs. leptin relationship demonstrated a weak statistical interaction with CRP (p=0.04). We observed no similar interaction in EMAS subjects, and no significant interactions with other measures of adiposity in BRHS or EMAS cohorts. CONCLUSION: We have shown that plasma CRP has little influence on the relationship between measures of adiposity and serum leptin levels in these middle-aged and elderly male European cohorts. This study provides epidemiological evidence against CRP having a significant role in causing leptin resistance.
-------------------------------------

10007065_234 - 0.87684746803 - science
[esophageal, hpv, squamous, carcinoma, cell, ci, association, type, subject, antibody]

InterSCOPE study: Associations between esophageal squamous cell carcinoma and human papillomavirus serological markers.
BACKGROUND: The role of human papillomavirus (HPV) in the causation of esophageal squamous cell carcinoma is unclear. We examined the associations between esophageal squamous cell carcinoma and 28 centrally measured HPV serological markers in serum from six existing case-control studies conducted in regions with differing background risks of esophageal cancer. METHODS: We used centralized multiplex serology to test serum samples from 1561 case subjects and 2502 control subjects from six case-control studies for antibodies to the major HPV capsid protein (L1) and/or the early proteins E6 and/or E7 of eight high-risk, two low-risk, and four cutaneous HPV types. Study-specific odds ratios (ORs) and corresponding 95% confidence intervals (CIs) were estimated using conditional logistic regression with adjustment for smoking, alcohol consumption, and other potential confounders. Pooled odds ratios and 95% confidence intervals were calculated using either a linear mixed-effects approach or a joint fixed-effects approach. All statistical tests were two-sided. RESULTS: We found statistically significant associations between esophageal squamous cell carcinoma and antibodies to E6 for HPV16 (OR = 1.89, 95% CI = 1.09 to 3.29, P = .023) and HPV6 (OR = 2.53, 95% CI = 1.51 to 4.25, P < .001) but not for other tested HPV types. There were no statistically significant associations between esophageal squamous cell carcinoma and antibodies to E7 for any of the tested HPV types. Simultaneous seropositivity for HPV16 E6 and E7 was rare (four case subjects, two control subjects; OR = 5.57, 95% CI = 0.90 to 34.35; P = .064). We also found statistically significant associations between esophageal squamous cell carcinoma and capsid antibodies for the high-risk mucosal type HPV33 L1 (OR = 1.30, 95% CI = 1.00 to 1.69; P = .047) and the low-risk mucosal types HPV6 (OR = 1.22, 95% CI = 1.05 to 1.42; P = .010) and HPV11 (OR = 1.30, 95% CI = 1.09 to 1.56, P = .0036). CONCLUSIONS: We found limited serological evidence of an association between esophageal squamous cell carcinoma and HPV in the populations studied. Although HPV does not appear to be an important risk factor for esophageal squamous cell carcinoma, we cannot exclude the possibility that certain HPV types may be involved in a small subset of cancers.
-------------------------------------

10005269_234 - 0.92881639448 - science
[biomaterial, fibroblast, fibronectin, attachment, derivative, cell, novel]

Shear-aggregated fibronectin with anti-adhesive properties.
Biomaterials based on proteins, such as fibronectin, have the potential to guide cell and tissue behaviour during healing as a function of their unique mechanical and bioactive properties. Fibronectin has been reported as a scaffold for attachment of fibroblasts and subsequent deposition of collagen. We have recently developed a derivative process of shear-aggregated fibronectin that prevents cell attachment without causing cell death. This has potential applications in clinical situations where adhesions form across gliding surfaces and cause loss of function, e.g. peritoneal or flexor tendon adhesions. This in vitro study tested this derivative fibronectin biomaterial and its effects on aggressive adhesion-forming cells, using rabbit flexor tendon synovial fibroblasts. We investigated degradation of the novel biomaterial, and attachment of fibroblasts to glass coated with the biomaterial, relative to fibroblast attachment to uncoated and fibronectin-coated glass. We assessed infiltration of the derivative fibronectin biomaterial by fibroblasts and cytotoxicity of the biomaterial to fibroblasts. The interaction between fibroblasts and the derivative fibronectin biomaterial was visualized using time-lapse photography. The derivative fibronectin biomaterial dissolved by 88% of its mass by 3 weeks. Fibroblast attachment to the novel biomaterial was significantly reduced at 6 h. After 24 h of exposure to the novel biomaterial, fibroblasts did not migrate into it, there was no cell death and no attachment was seen using time-lapse. This novel derivative fibronectin biomaterial combines inhibition of fibroblast attachment with barrier effects and has suitable mechanical properties for surgical use in preventing adhesions in vivo.
-------------------------------------

10007412_234 - 0.701712568003 - science
[pulsar, gamma-ray, frequency, psr, time, j0106, method]

Discovery of Nine Gamma-Ray Pulsars in Fermi Large Area Telescope Data Using a New Blind Search Method
We report the discovery of nine previously unknown gamma-ray pulsars ina blind search of data from the Fermi Large Area Telescope (LAT). Thepulsars were found with a novel hierarchical search method originallydeveloped for detecting continuous gravitational waves from rapidlyrotating neutron stars. Designed to find isolated pulsars spinning at upto kHz frequencies, the new method is computationally efficient andincorporates several advances, including a metric-based gridding of thesearch parameter space (frequency, frequency derivative, and skylocation) and the use of photon probability weights. The nine pulsarshave spin frequencies between 3 and 12 Hz, and characteristic agesranging from 17 kyr to 3 Myr. Two of them, PSRs J1803-2149 and J2111+4606, are young and energetic Galactic-plane pulsars (spin-down powerabove 6 {\times} 10$^{35}$ erg s$^{-1}$ and ages below 100kyr). The seven remaining pulsars, PSRs J0106+4855, J0622+3749,J1620-4927, J1746-3239, J2028+3332, J2030+4415, and J2139+4716, areolder and less energetic; two of them are located at higher Galacticlatitudes (|b| {\gt} 10{\deg}). PSR J0106+4855 has the largestcharacteristic age (3 Myr) and the smallest surface magnetic field (2{\times} 10$^{11}$ G) of all LAT blind-search pulsars. PSRJ2139+4716 has the lowest spin-down power (3 {\times} 10$^{33}$ ergs$^{-1}$) among all non-recycled gamma-ray pulsars ever found.Despite extensive multi-frequency observations, only PSR J0106+4855 hasdetectable pulsations in the radio band. The other eight pulsars belongto the increasing population of radio-quiet gamma-ray pulsars.
-------------------------------------

10008598_234 - 0.795410229464 - science
[cell, mouse, lymph, node, oxazolone, pyroninophilic]

Antigen-specific and non-specific depression of proliferative responses induced during contact sensitivity in mice.
Exposure of the flank of mice to either oxazolone or trinitrochlorobenzene (TNCB) 5 days prior to the application of oxazolone on the ear resulted in a reduced capacity of oxazolone-induced draining lymph node cells to express IL-2 receptors, produce IL-2, protein, RNA and DNA. However, histological examination of the draining lymph node suggest that antigen-specific and antigen-non-specific influences differ with respect to the frequency of pyroninophilic cells. Pre-exposure to oxazolone suppressed the number of oxazolone-induced pyroninophilic T cell blasts, whereas draining lymph nodes from TNCB-pretreated mice contained significantly more pyroninophilic cells than from oxazolone-pretreated mice. However, the majority of these cells were incorporating little or no thymidine. Thus exposure to certain contact sensitizers induces at least two systemic control mechanisms which serve to regulate subsequent lymphoproliferative responses. These mechanisms appear to exert their influences at different stages of in-vivo T cell activation.
-------------------------------------

10011640_234 - 0.886196589955 - science
[inclusion, synuclein, formation, gene, disease, ??]

C. elegans Model Identifies Genetic Modifiers of α-Synuclein Inclusion Formation During Aging
Inclusions in the brain containing ??-synuclein are the pathological hallmark of Parkinson's disease, but how these inclusions are formed and how this links to disease is poorly understood. We have developed a C. elegans model that makes it possible to monitor, in living animals, the formation of ??-synuclein inclusions. In worms of old age, inclusions contain aggregated ??-synuclein, resembling a critical pathological feature. We used genome-wide RNA interference to identify processes involved in inclusion formation, and identified 80 genes that, when knocked down, resulted in a premature increase in the number of inclusions. Quality control and vesicle-trafficking genes expressed in the ER/Golgi complex and vesicular compartments were overrepresented, indicating a specific role for these processes in ??-synuclein inclusion formation. Suppressors include aging-associated genes, such as sir-2.1/SIRT1 and lagr-1/LASS2. Altogether, our data suggest a link between ??-synuclein inclusion formation and cellular aging, likely through an endomembrane-related mechanism. The processes and genes identified here present a framework for further study of the disease mechanism and provide candidate susceptibility genes and drug targets for Parkinson's disease and other ??-synuclein related disorders.?? 2008 van Ham et al.
-------------------------------------

10008623_234 - 0.867359748364 - science
[irritant, response, skin, epidermal]

Investigation of TNF-alpha release as a measure of skin irritancy.
Contact dermatitis is by far the most frequently reported occupational disease, with irritant dermatitis accounting for up to 80% of all cases. A wide variety of materials are capable of causing skin inflammation including soaps, cosmetics, pesticides, organic dyes, solvents and industrial chemicals and wastes. Skin irritation results from a complex series of events involving the development of an inflammatory response at the site of exposure. Cytokines are a family of proteins and glycoproteins that regulate immune and inflammatory responses; many are produced by epidermal cells. The present study examines the response of mouse epidermal strips to the cutaneous irritant sodium dodecyl sulphate (SDS). A time-dependent relationship was established for the release of the cytokine tumour necrosis factor-alpha, from epidermal keratinocytes after treatment with 20% SDS. The potential value of this methodology for the detection of cutaneous irritants has been established. The utility of the approach for the identification in vitro of other materials of known in vivo irritant potential will be investigated.
-------------------------------------

10005294_234 - 0.796528291508 - science
[sedimentary, study, visean, carboniferous, thick, aim]

SEDIMENTOLOGY OF THE LOWER CARBONIFEROUS IN SOUTH-WESTERN LIBYA
Several hydrocarbon discoveries in the Marar Formation (Tournaisian and Viséan) were recently made in the Lower Carboniferous strata of the Ghadames and Murzuq Basins situated in SW Libya. Despite large exposures exhibiting thick sections, there is an absence of regional studies focusing on this stratigraphic interval and only rare case studies provide new sedimentary data. More generally, geological knowledge of Carboniferous in North Africa (Saharan Platform) is also understudied when compare to other regions of the world. Detail analyses of the sedimentary record on Saharan Platform may noticeably contribute to refine the current understanding of global geological episodes such as the Late Paleozoic Ice Age.The main aim of this study is to produce valuable field data for both industry and interpretations for assessing academic hypothesis. In order to develop accurate and detail correlations of sedimentary strata over long distances (over 350 km) a primary aims is to define a synchronous key marker horizon that is ideally detectable in both surface and subsurface datasets. A secondary aim is to characterise spatial variability and geometries of sedimentary bodies.Acquired during three fieldwork seasons in the area (along ca 385 km), over 4800 m of sedimentary logging, facies analyses and 800 outcrop gamma ray readings are compiled in this study. I therefore characterise the micro, meso, macro-scale geometries, regional distribution, gamma ray response and mineralogy of the Collenia stromatolites that mark the uppermost part of the Marar Formation. Mainly based on series of detailed sedimentary logging and photographic panoramas, two types of reservoirs facies are described: 1- several metres thick shorefaces sandstones that are continuous for several tens of kilometres; 2- several tens of metres thick incised valley in filled with fluvial sandstones of fewer lateral extend. A sea level curve, produced on basis of the detailed sequence stratigraphic framework of the area, reveals that eustasy almost solely explains relative changes of sea level during the Viséan. Considering the glacial record preserved on northern Gondwana during the same interval, we conclude that the onset of the Late Paleozoic Ice Age is older than uppermost Viséan and more gradual than previously thought.
-------------------------------------

10002321_234 - 0.802485986531 - science
[pressure, quinonoid, effect, intermediate, formation, ph, mpa, mol, reaction, rate]

Evidence of Preorganization in Quinonoid Intermediate Formation from l-Trp in H463F Mutant Escherichia coli Tryptophan Indole-lyase from Effects of Pressure and pH.
The effects of pH and hydrostatic pressure on the reaction of H463F tryptophan indole-lyase (TIL) have been evaluated. The mutant TIL shows very low activity for elimination of indole but is still competent to form a quinonoid intermediate from l-tryptophan Phillips, R. S., Johnson, N., and Kamath, A. V. (2002) Biochemistry 41, 4012-4019. Stopped-flow measurements show that the formation of the quinonoid intermediate at 505 nm is affected by pH, with a bell-shaped dependence for the forward rate constant, k(f), and dependence on a single basic group for the reverse rate constant, k(r), with the following values: pK(a1) = 8.14 ± 0.15, pK(a2) = 7.54 ± 0.15, k(f,min) = 18.1 ± 1.3 s(-1), k(f,max) = 179 ± 46.3 s(-1), k(r,min) = 11.4 ± 1.2 s(-1), and k(r,max) = 33 ± 1.6 s(-1). The pH effects may be due to ionization of Tyr74 as the base and Cys298 as the acid influencing the rate constant for deprotonation. High-pressure stopped-flow measurements were performed at pH 8, which is the optimum for the forward reaction. The rate constants show an increase with pressure up to 100 MPa and a subsequent decrease above 100 MPa. Fitting the pressure data gives the following values: k(f,0) = 15.4 ± 0.8 s(-1), ΔV(⧧) = -29.4 ± 2.9 cm(3) mol(-1), and Δβ(⧧) = -0.23 ± 0.03 cm(3) mol(-1) MPa(-1) for the forward reaction, and k(r,0) = 20.7 ± 0.8 s(-1), ΔV(⧧) = -9.6 ± 2.3 cm(3) mol(-1), and Δβ(⧧) = -0.05 ± 0.02 cm(3) mol(-1) MPa(-1) for the reverse reaction. The primary kinetic isotope effect on quinonoid intermediate formation at pH 8 is small (∼2) and is not significantly pressure-dependent, suggesting that the effect of pressure on k(f) may be due to perturbation of an active site preorganization step. The negative activation volume is also consistent with preorganization of the ES complex prior to quinonoid intermediate formation, and the negative compressibility may be due to the effect of pressure on the enzyme conformation. These results support the conclusion that the preorganization of the H463F TIL Trp complex, which is probably dominated by motion of the l-Trp indole moiety of the aldimine complex, contributes to quinonoid intermediate formation.
-------------------------------------

