10006930_234 - 0.922257671088 - science
[light, photoreceptor, retinal, clock, response, melanopsin, iprgc]

How rod, cone, and melanopsin photoreceptors come together to enlighten the mammalian circadian clock.
In mammals, a small number of retinal ganglion cells express melanopsin, an opsin photopigment, allowing them to be directly photoreceptive. A major function of these so-called intrinsically photosensitive retinal ganglion cells (ipRGCs) is to synchronize (entrain) endogenous circadian clocks to the external light:dark cycle. Thanks to their intrinsic light response, ipRGCs can support photoentrainment even when the other retinal photoreceptors (rods and cones) are absent or inactive. However, in the intact retina the ipRGC light response is a composite of extrinsic (rod/cone) and intrinsic (melanopsin) influences. As a result all three photoreceptor classes contribute to the retinal pathways providing light information to the clock. Here, we consider what each photoreceptor type contributes to the clock light response. We review electrophysiological and behavioral data pertinent to this question, primarily from laboratory rodents, drawing them together to provide a conceptual model in which each photoreceptor class plays a distinct role in encoding the light environment. We finally use this model to highlight some of the important outstanding questions in this field.
-------------------------------------

10006892_234 - 0.81744173519 - science
[cell, ccr7]

CCR7 signaling inhibits T cell proliferation.
CCR7 and its ligands, CCL19 and CCL21, are responsible for directing the migration of T cells and dendritic cells into lymph nodes, where these cells play an important role in the initiation of the immune response. Recently, we have shown that systemic application of CCL19-IgG is able to inhibit the colocalization of T cells and dendritic cells within secondary lymphoid organs, resulting in pronounced immunosuppression with reduced allograft rejection after organ transplantation. In this study, we demonstrate that the application of sustained high concentrations of either soluble or immobilized CCL19 and CCL21 elicits an inhibitory program in T cells. We show that these ligands specifically interfere with cell proliferation and IL-2 secretion of CCR7(+) cells. This could be demonstrated for human and murine T cells and was valid for both CD4(+) and CD8(+) T cells. In contrast, CCL19 had no inhibitory effect on T cells from CCR7 knockout mice, but CCR7(-/-) T cells showed a proliferative response upon TCR-stimulation similar to that of CCL19-treated wild-type cells. Furthermore, the inhibition of proliferation is associated with delayed degradation of the cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) inhibitor p27(Kip1) and the down-regulation of CDK1. This shows that CCR7 signaling is linked to cell cycle control and that sustained engagement of CCR7, either by high concentrations of soluble ligands or by high density of immobilized ligands, is capable of inducing cell cycle arrest in TCR-stimulated cells. Thus, CCR7, a chemokine receptor that has been demonstrated to play an essential role during activation of the immune response, is also competent to directly inhibit T cell proliferation.
-------------------------------------

10006965_234 - 0.927361590905 - science
[gradient, transmural, protein, adult, mrna, endocardium, case, apd, change]

Postnatal development of transmural gradients in expression of ion channels and Ca²⁺-handling proteins in the ventricle.
Transmural gradients in myocyte action potential duration (APD) and Ca(2+)-handling proteins are argued to be important for both the normal functioning of the ventricle and arrhythmogenesis. In rabbit, the transmural gradient in APD (left ventricular wedge preparation) is minimal in the neonate. During postnatal development, APD increases both in the epicardium and the endocardium, but the prolongation is more substantial in the endocardium leading to a significant transmural gradient. We have investigated changes in the expression of ion channels and also Ca(2+)-handling proteins in the subepicardial and subendocardial layers of the left ventricular free wall in neonatal (2-7 days of age) and adult male (~6 months of age) New Zealand White rabbits using quantitative PCR and also, when possible, in situ hybridisation and immunohistochemistry. In the adult, there were significant and substantial transmural gradients in Ca(v)1.2, KChIP2, ERG, K(v)LQT1, K(ir)2.1, NCX1, SERCA2a and RyR2 at the mRNA and, in some cases, protein level-in every case the mRNA or protein was more abundant in the epicardium than the endocardium. Of the eight transmural gradients seen in the adult, only three were observed in the neonate and, in two of these cases, the gradients were smaller than those in the adult. However, in the neonate there were also transmural gradients not observed in the adult: in HCN4, Na(v)1.5, minK, K(ir)3.1 and Cx40 mRNAs - in every case the mRNA was more abundant in the endocardium than the epicardium. If the postnatal changes in ion channel mRNAs are used to predict changes in ionic conductances, mathematical modelling predicts the changes in APD observed experimentally. It is concluded that many of the well known transmural gradients in the ventricle develop postnatally.
-------------------------------------

10005584_234 - 0.879395290842 - medicine
[ispaghulum, placebo, bowel, patient, syndrome, transit, time, group, irritable]

Double blind study of ispaghula in irritable bowel syndrome.
A double blind placebo controlled trial of ispaghula husk in 80 patients with irritable bowel syndrome is reported. Global assessment judged treatment to be satisfactory in 82% of patients receiving ispaghula and 53% of the placebo group (p less than 0.02). Bowel habit was unchanged in the placebo group, while constipation significantly improved in patients taking ispaghula (p = 0.026). Transit time decreased significantly in those taking ispaghula compared with placebo (p = 0.001), especially in patients with initially high transit times. Abdominal pain and bloating improved in both groups, with no significant differences between ispaghula and placebo. Four of the eight withdrawals on ispaghula and 10 of the 15 withdrawals on placebo were because of treatment failure. Ispaghula significantly improves overall well being in patients with irritable bowel syndrome, and in those with constipation favourably affects bowel habit and transit time.
-------------------------------------

10005629_234 - 0.705373121376 - medicine
[sumatriptan, chest, oesophageal]

Is chest pain after sumatriptan oesophageal in origin?
3-5% of patients taking the 5HT1D agonist sumatriptan for migraine have chest discomfort, suggesting a cardiac origin. We have investigated an alternative explanation of an oesophageal cause in 24 volunteers after the subcutaneous administration of a supratherapeutic dose of sumatriptan (16 mg) or placebo in a randomised, double-blind crossover study. Sumatriptan did not alter the electrocardiogram but increased the amplitude (p < 0.001) and duration (p < 0.001) of oesophageal contractions without affecting velocity of propagation. Clinically abnormal motility was also increased (p = 0.001), and was more common in the 5 subjects with chest pain after sumatriptan. The effect of sumatriptan on oesophageal function provides an alternative explanation for the chest symptoms.
-------------------------------------

10005592_234 - 0.767155351663 - science
[artery, crohn, disease, carotid]

Internal carotid artery occlusion in association with Crohn's disease.
A 38-year-old white male with small bowel Crohn's disease presented with an acute right-sided cerebrovascular accident. He died 36 hr later and postmortem revealed thrombosis over the whole length of an otherwise completely normal left internal carotid artery. Histological examination of the artery revealed no abnormalities and in particular no evidence of arteritis. This brings the total number of such cases reported to three, but this is the first with postmortem data. The occurrence of such an event in a young person with normal carotid arteries and no other risk factors would suggest an association with his Crohn's disease, possibly as a result of a coagulation abnormality.
-------------------------------------

10006795_234 - 0.824812289668 - science
[gamma, psr, ray, field, pulsar, plusmn]

Observations of Energetic High Magnetic Field Pulsars with the Fermi Large Area Telescope
We report the detection of {$\gamma$}-ray pulsations from thehigh-magnetic-field rotation-powered pulsar PSR J1119-6127 using datafrom the Fermi Large Area Telescope. The {$\gamma$}-ray light curve of PSRJ1119-6127 shows a single, wide peak offset from the radio peak by 0.43{\plusmn} 0.02 in phase. Spectral analysis suggests a power law of index1.0 {\plusmn} 0.3$^{+0.4}$ $_{- 0.2}$ with an energy cutoffat 0.8 {\plusmn} 0.2$^{+2.0}$ $_{- 0.5}$ GeV. The firstuncertainty is statistical and the second is systematic. We discuss theemission models of PSR J1119-6127 and demonstrate that despite theobject's high surface magnetic field{\mdash}near that ofmagnetars{\mdash}the field strength and structure in the {$\gamma$}-rayemitting zone are apparently similar to those of typical young pulsars.Additionally, we present upper limits on the {$\gamma$}-ray pulsed emissionfor the magnetically active PSR J1846-0258 in the supernova remnantKesteven 75 and two other energetic high-B pulsars, PSRs J1718-3718 andJ1734-3333. We explore possible explanations for the non-detection ofthese three objects, including peculiarities in their emission geometry.
-------------------------------------

10006929_234 - 0.878571416085 - science
[opsin, optogenetic, jellyop, tool, rod, light]

Reproducible and sustained regulation of Gαs signalling using a metazoan opsin as an optogenetic tool.
Originally developed to regulate neuronal excitability, optogenetics is increasingly also used to control other cellular processes with unprecedented spatiotemporal resolution. Optogenetic modulation of all major G-protein signalling pathways (Gq, Gi and Gs) has been achieved using variants of mammalian rod opsin. We show here that the light response driven by such rod opsin-based tools dissipates under repeated exposure, consistent with the known bleaching characteristics of this photopigment. We continue to show that replacing rod opsin with a bleach resistant opsin from Carybdea rastonii, the box jellyfish, (JellyOp) overcomes this limitation. Visible light induced high amplitude, reversible, and reproducible increases in cAMP in mammalian cells expressing JellyOp. While single flashes produced a brief cAMP spike, repeated stimulation could sustain elevated levels for 10s of minutes. JellyOp was more photosensitive than currently available optogenetic tools, responding to white light at irradiances ≥1 µW/cm(2). We conclude that JellyOp is a promising new tool for mimicking the activity of Gs-coupled G protein coupled receptors with fine spatiotemporal resolution.
-------------------------------------

10005606_234 - 0.790879615958 - medicine
[amiodarone, overdose]

Amiodarone overdose and its management.
A patient taking an overdose of 3.4 g of amiodarone is described. Consciousness and physical examination remained normal throughout. Continuous electrocardiographic monitoring for 48 hours after admission revealed only a self-limiting episode of ventricular tachycardia, despite high serum levels of the drug (serum desethylamiodarone levels 4.4 mg/l). The pharmacokinetic properties of amiodarone and treatment strategies for the overdose situation are discussed. It is suggested that there may be a role for the use of cholestyramine in the treatment of both acute and chronic amiodarone toxicity.
-------------------------------------

10005599_234 - 0.745198398664 - science
[agonist, bowel, syndrome, irritable, lidamidine, alpha, study, double-blind, abdominal, frequency, hydrochloride, significant]

Double-blind study of an alpha 2 agonist in the treatment of irritable bowel syndrome.
A double-blind crossover trial of the alpha 2 agonist lidamidine hydrochloride in 72 patients with irritable bowel syndrome is reported. Lidamidine was found to have no significant effect on frequency and severity of abdominal pain or abdominal bloating. It did cause a statistically significant reduction in frequency of defaecation (P = 0.005), but this was of a degree unlikely to be of clinical importance. Although alpha 2 agonists inhibit gastrointestinal motility in animals this study suggests that lidamidine hydrochloride does not have a useful therapeutic role in irritable bowel syndrome.
-------------------------------------

10005610_234 - 0.91954165956 - medicine
[patient, bowel, syndrome, change, irritable, hypnotherapy, sensitivity, rectal]

Changes in rectal sensitivity after hypnotherapy in patients with irritable bowel syndrome.
Fifteen patients with the irritable bowel syndrome were studied to assess the effect of hypnotherapy on anorectal physiology. In comparison with a control group of 15 patients who received no hypnotherapy significant changes in rectal sensitivity were found in patients with diarrhoea-predominant irritable bowel syndrome both after a course of hypnotherapy and during a session of hypnosis (p less than 0.05). Although patient numbers were small, a trend towards normalisation of rectal sensitivity was also observed in patients with constipation-predominant irritable bowel syndrome. No changes in rectal compliance or distension-induced motor activity occurred in either subgroup nor were any changes in somatic pain thresholds observed. The results suggest that symptomatic improvement in irritable bowel syndrome after hypnotherapy may in part be due to changes in visceral sensitivity.
-------------------------------------

10006993_234 - 0.845761863155 - technology_and_computing
[database, software, literature, variability, ambiguity]

Ambiguity and Variability of Database and Software Names in Bioinformatics
There are now numerous options available to achieve various tasks in bioinformatics but, as yet, little progress has been made to capture the common practice by analysing usage and mentions of databases and tools within the literature. In this paper we analyse the variability and ambiguity of database and software name mentions and provide a set of 30 full-text documents manually annotated on the mention level. Our analyses show that identification of mentions of databases and tools is not a task that can be achieved through dictionary matching alone: our baseline dictionary look-up achieved a F-score of just over 50%. This is primarily because of high variability and ambiguity in database and software mentions contained within the literature and due to the extensive number of resources available. We characterise the issues with various mention types and propose potential ways of capturing additional database and software mentions in the literature.
-------------------------------------

10006961_234 - 0.796157923275 - science
[focal, atrial, model, algorithm, atrium, origin]

Correlation between P-wave morphology and origin of atrial focal tachycardia--insights from realistic models of the human atria and torso.
Atrial arrhythmias resulting from abnormally rapid focal activity in the atria may be reflected in an altered P-wave morphology (PWM) in the ECG. Although clinically important, detailed relationships between PWM and origins of atrial focal excitations have not been established. To study such relationships, we developed computational models of the human atria and torso. The model simulation results were used to evaluate an extant clinical algorithm for locating the origin of atrial focal points from the ECG. The simulations showed that the algorithm was practical and could predict the atrial focal locations with 85% accuracy. We proposed a further refinement of the algorithm to distinguish between focal locations within the large atrial bundles.
-------------------------------------

10006957_234 - 0.812862327637 - science
[atrial, atrium, human, model, tissue, computational, ap, virtual, clinical, normal]

3D virtual human atria: A computational platform for studying clinical atrial fibrillation.
Despite a vast amount of experimental and clinical data on the underlying ionic, cellular and tissue substrates, the mechanisms of common atrial arrhythmias (such as atrial fibrillation, AF) arising from the functional interactions at the whole atria level remain unclear. Computational modelling provides a quantitative framework for integrating such multi-scale data and understanding the arrhythmogenic behaviour that emerges from the collective spatio-temporal dynamics in all parts of the heart. In this study, we have developed a multi-scale hierarchy of biophysically detailed computational models for the human atria--the 3D virtual human atria. Primarily, diffusion tensor MRI reconstruction of the tissue geometry and fibre orientation in the human sinoatrial node (SAN) and surrounding atrial muscle was integrated into the 3D model of the whole atria dissected from the Visible Human dataset. The anatomical models were combined with the heterogeneous atrial action potential (AP) models, and used to simulate the AP conduction in the human atria under various conditions: SAN pacemaking and atrial activation in the normal rhythm, break-down of regular AP wave-fronts during rapid atrial pacing, and the genesis of multiple re-entrant wavelets characteristic of AF. Contributions of different properties of the tissue to mechanisms of the normal rhythm and arrhythmogenesis were investigated. Primarily, the simulations showed that tissue heterogeneity caused the break-down of the normal AP wave-fronts at rapid pacing rates, which initiated a pair of re-entrant spiral waves; and tissue anisotropy resulted in a further break-down of the spiral waves into multiple meandering wavelets characteristic of AF. The 3D virtual atria model itself was incorporated into the torso model to simulate the body surface ECG patterns in the normal and arrhythmic conditions. Therefore, a state-of-the-art computational platform has been developed, which can be used for studying multi-scale electrical phenomena during atrial conduction and AF arrhythmogenesis. Results of such simulations can be directly compared with electrophysiological and endocardial mapping data, as well as clinical ECG recordings. The virtual human atria can provide in-depth insights into 3D excitation propagation processes within atrial walls of a whole heart in vivo, which is beyond the current technical capabilities of experimental or clinical set-ups.
-------------------------------------

10005622_234 - 0.776997388368 - science
[hyperventilation, bowel, syndrome, sensitivity, irritable, colonic, rectal]

Effect of hyperventilation on distal colonic motility and rectal sensitivity in irritable bowel syndrome.
Hyperventilation is associated with some symptoms suggestive of irritable bowel syndrome and has been implicated in provoking excessive oesophageal contractility. Sixteen patients with irritable bowel syndrome were therefore studied in order to assess the effect of hyperventilation on distal colonic motility and rectal sensitivity. No significant change in either the amplitude or frequency of colonic contractile activity was noted following hyperventilation, nor was any alteration in rectal sensitivity observed. This study shows that acute hyperventilation does not affect colonic motor activity or visceral sensitivity and suggests that hyperventilation and irritable bowel syndrome are not causally related.
-------------------------------------

10007189_234 - 0.906645080354 - technology_and_computing
[design, architecture, system]

Overview of the SpiNNaker System Architecture
SpiNNaker (a contraction of Spiking Neural Network Architecture) is a million-core computing engine whose flagship goal is to be able to simulate the behaviour of aggregates of up to a billion neurons in real time. It consists of an array of ARM9 cores, communicating via packets carried by a custom interconnect fabric. The packets are small (40 or 72 bits), and their transmission is brokered entirely by hardware, giving the overall engine an extremely high bisection bandwidth of over 5 billion packets/s. Three of the principle axioms of parallel machine design -- memory coherence, synchronicity and determinism -- have been discarded in the design without, surprisingly, compromising the ability to perform meaningful computations. A further attribute of the system is the acknowledgement, from the initial design stages, that the sheer size of the implementation will make component failures an inevitable aspect of day-to-day operation, and fault detection and recovery mechanisms have been built into the system at many levels of abstraction. This paper describes the architecture of the machine and outlines the underlying design philosophy; software and applications are to be described in detail elsewhere, and only introduced in passing here as necessary to illuminate the description.
-------------------------------------

10005625_234 - 0.821326866777 - medicine
[attender, chronic, bowel, syndrome, irritable, abdominal, symptom]

Outpatients with irritable bowel syndrome: a comparison of first time and chronic attenders.
Fifty two chronic clinic attenders with irritable bowel syndrome were compared with 97 newly referred patients in respect of physical symptoms and psychiatric status. Profound differences between the two groups emerged. Many abdominal and non-colonic symptoms were perceived as much more severe in chronic attenders compared with first time attenders (p less than 0.0001 for abdominal pain and abdominal distension). Chronic attenders were much more likely to complain of constant symptoms (p less than 0.05), and the social consequences of their illness were much more striking (p less than 0.0001). There was, however, no difference in the prevalence of psychiatric morbidity in the two groups. Clinical trials and other investigations of the irritable bowel syndrome are usually conducted on hospital outpatient populations. The results of this study indicate that the patient populations used for these purposes need to be carefully defined.
-------------------------------------

10005668_234 - 0.789548040544 - medicine
[tegaserod, study, symptom, bowel, treatment, ci, rr, ibs, gi]

Tegaserod for the treatment of irritable bowel syndrome.
BACKGROUND: IBS is a complex disorder that encompasses a wide profile of symptoms. Current drug treatments for irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) are of limited value. Many target specific symptoms only. Tegaserod, a 5HT(4) partial agonist, represents a novel mechanism of action in the treatment of IBS. OBJECTIVES: The objective of this review was to evaluate the efficacy and tolerability of tegaserod for the treatment of IBS in adults and adolescents aged 12 years and above. SEARCH STRATEGY: MEDLINE 1966-November 2002 and EMBASE 1980-November 2002 were searched. The text and key words used included "tegaserod", "HTF 919", "irritable bowel", and "colonic diseases, functional". The Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials, the Inflammatory Bowel Disease Review Group Specialized Trials Register, and Science Citation Index were also searched. Proceedings from the British Society of Gastroenterology Annual Meeting, and Digestive Disease Week (1998-2002) were hand searched. The manufacturer of tegaserod was contacted. Relevant articles were retrieved, and their reference lists were also reviewed. SELECTION CRITERIA: Randomised or quasi-randomised controlled trials comparing tegaserod with placebo, no treatment or any other intervention (pharmacological or non-pharmacological) in subjects aged 12 years and above with a diagnosis of IBS, focusing on clinical endpoints were considered for review. DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Study inclusion and exclusion, data extraction and quality assessment was undertaken by two reviewers independently. Meta-analysis was performed where study populations, designs, outcomes, and statistical reporting allowed combination of data in a valid way, using the summary statistic relative risk with 95% CI. Eight short-term placebo-controlled studies fulfilled our inclusion criteria. These were predominantly conducted in women. Seven studies evaluated the efficacy of tegaserod on global gastrointestinal (GI) symptoms in patients with constipation-predominant IBS (C-IBS). One small study evaluated safety in patients with diarrhoea-predominant IBS. MAIN RESULTS: The relative risk (RR) of being a responder in terms of global relief of GI symptoms was significantly higher with tegaserod 12 mg (RR 1.19, 95% CI 1.09, 1.29) and tegaserod 4 mg (RR 1.15, 95% CI 1.02, 1.31) compared with placebo, with a number needed to treat (NNT) of 14 and 20 respectively. When all tegaserod doses were combined and compared with placebo (n=4040), the RR of being a responder was 1.17 (95% CI 1.08, 1.27), with a NNT of 17. Although the pooled results indicate statistically significant benefit with tegaserod, the a priori minimal clinically important differences set in two of the four pooled studies were not reached. Tegaserod did not significantly improve the patients' individual symptoms of abdominal pain and discomfort although bowel habit showed a statistically significant improvement with tegaserod 4 mg and there was a non-significant trend in favour of tegaserod 12 mg. When GI symptoms were assessed separately, those indicative of GI motility such as number of bowel movements and days without bowel movements were generally improved with tegaserod although the proportion of patients experiencing diarrhoea was significantly higher in the tegaserod 12 mg group compared with placebo (RR 2.75, 95% CI 1.90, 3.97), with a number needed to harm (NNH) of 20. Effects of tegaserod on GI symptoms such as bloating, stool consistency, and straining were not consistent across the studies. REVIEWER'S CONCLUSIONS: Tegaserod appears to improve the overall symptomatology of IBS but there are currently few data on its effect on quality of life. In addition, more information is needed about its efficacy in men. It would also be of interest to know whether treatment with tegaserod leads either directly, or indirectly, to changes in visceral sensitivity or psychopathology, which are also considered important in the pathophysiology of this condition.
-------------------------------------

10007013_234 - 0.894284916018 - science
[particle, plume, similar, excess, aerosol, emission, oa, factor, co2, concentration, gas, increase, nitrate, evolution, biomass, light, production, delta, burning, study, aging, scattering, california, ammonium]

Evolution of trace gases and particles emitted by a chaparral fire in California
Biomass burning (BB) is a major global source of trace gases and particles. Accurately representing the production and evolution of these emissions is an important goal for atmospheric chemical transport models. We measured a suite of gases and aerosols emitted from an 81 hectare prescribed fire in chaparral fuels on the central coast of California, US on 17 November 2009. We also measured physical and chemical changes that occurred in the isolated down-wind plume in the first similar to 4 h after emission. The measurements were carried out onboard a Twin Otter aircraft outfitted with an airborne Fourier transform infrared spectrometer (AFTIR), aerosol mass spectrometer (AMS), single particle soot photometer (SP2), nephelometer, LiCor CO2 analyzer, a chemiluminescence ozone instrument, and a wing-mounted meteorological probe. Our measurements included: CO2; CO; NOx; NH3; non-methane organic compounds; organic aerosol (OA); inorganic aerosol (nitrate, ammonium, sulfate, and chloride); aerosol light scattering; refractory black carbon (rBC); and ambient temperature, relative humidity, barometric pressure, and three-dimensional wind velocity. The molar ratio of excess O-3 to excess CO in the plume (Delta O-3/Delta CO) increased from -5.13 (+/- 1.13) x 10(-3) to 10.2 (+/- 2.16) x 10(-2) in similar to 4.5 h following smoke emission. Excess acetic and formic acid (normalized to excess CO) increased by factors of 1.73 +/- 0.43 and 7.34 +/- 3.03 (respectively) over the same time since emission. Based on the rapid decay of C2H4 we infer an in-plume average OH concentration of 5.27 (+/- 0.97) x 10(6) molec cm(-3), consistent with previous studies showing elevated OH concentrations in biomass burning plumes. Ammonium, nitrate, and sulfate all increased over the course of 4 h. The observed ammonium increase was a factor of 3.90 +/- 2.93 in about 4 h, but accounted for just similar to 36\% of the gaseous ammonia lost on a molar basis. Some of the gas phase NH3 loss may have been due to condensation on, or formation of, particles below the AMS detection range. NOx was converted to PAN and particle nitrate with PAN production being about two times greater than production of observable nitrate in the first similar to 4 h following emission. The excess aerosol light scattering in the plume (normalized to excess CO2) increased by a factor of 2.50 +/- 0.74 over 4 h. The increase in light scattering was similar to that observed in an earlier study of a biomass burning plume in Mexico where significant secondary formation of OA closely tracked the increase in scattering. In the California plume, however, Delta OA/Delta CO2 decreased sharply for the first hour and then increased slowly with a net decrease of similar to 20\% over 4 h. The fraction of thickly coated rBC particles increased up to similar to 85\% over the 4 h aging period. Decreasing OA accompanied by increased scattering/particle coating in initial aging may be due to a combination of particle coagulation and evaporation processes. Recondensation of species initially evaporated from the particles may have contributed to the subsequent slow rise in OA. We compare our results to observations from other plume aging studies and suggest that differences in environmental factors such as smoke concentration, oxidant concentration, actinic flux, and RH contribute significantly to the variation in plume evolution observations.
-------------------------------------

10007065_234 - 0.904120095945 - science
[esophageal, hpv, squamous, carcinoma, cell, ci, association, type, subject, antibody]

InterSCOPE study: Associations between esophageal squamous cell carcinoma and human papillomavirus serological markers.
BACKGROUND: The role of human papillomavirus (HPV) in the causation of esophageal squamous cell carcinoma is unclear. We examined the associations between esophageal squamous cell carcinoma and 28 centrally measured HPV serological markers in serum from six existing case-control studies conducted in regions with differing background risks of esophageal cancer. METHODS: We used centralized multiplex serology to test serum samples from 1561 case subjects and 2502 control subjects from six case-control studies for antibodies to the major HPV capsid protein (L1) and/or the early proteins E6 and/or E7 of eight high-risk, two low-risk, and four cutaneous HPV types. Study-specific odds ratios (ORs) and corresponding 95% confidence intervals (CIs) were estimated using conditional logistic regression with adjustment for smoking, alcohol consumption, and other potential confounders. Pooled odds ratios and 95% confidence intervals were calculated using either a linear mixed-effects approach or a joint fixed-effects approach. All statistical tests were two-sided. RESULTS: We found statistically significant associations between esophageal squamous cell carcinoma and antibodies to E6 for HPV16 (OR = 1.89, 95% CI = 1.09 to 3.29, P = .023) and HPV6 (OR = 2.53, 95% CI = 1.51 to 4.25, P < .001) but not for other tested HPV types. There were no statistically significant associations between esophageal squamous cell carcinoma and antibodies to E7 for any of the tested HPV types. Simultaneous seropositivity for HPV16 E6 and E7 was rare (four case subjects, two control subjects; OR = 5.57, 95% CI = 0.90 to 34.35; P = .064). We also found statistically significant associations between esophageal squamous cell carcinoma and capsid antibodies for the high-risk mucosal type HPV33 L1 (OR = 1.30, 95% CI = 1.00 to 1.69; P = .047) and the low-risk mucosal types HPV6 (OR = 1.22, 95% CI = 1.05 to 1.42; P = .010) and HPV11 (OR = 1.30, 95% CI = 1.09 to 1.56, P = .0036). CONCLUSIONS: We found limited serological evidence of an association between esophageal squamous cell carcinoma and HPV in the populations studied. Although HPV does not appear to be an important risk factor for esophageal squamous cell carcinoma, we cannot exclude the possibility that certain HPV types may be involved in a small subset of cancers.
-------------------------------------

10005587_234 - 0.914677691609 - science
[nicardipine, acid, basal]

Effect of nicardipine on gastric acid secretion in man.
The effect of nicardipine on basal and pentagastrin-stimulated gastric acid secretion in normal volunteers was investigated. When compared with saline, an intravenous infusion of nicardipine caused a significant decrease in peak acid output (from 37.8 mmol hour-1 to 28.8 mmol hour-1; P = 0.04) and a small reduction in aspirate volume. Nicardipine had no significant action on basal acid output or volume of aspirate. Proteolytic activity in both the basal and stimulated periods was unaffected by nicardipine as were serum gastrin concentrations. Although calcium channel blocking agents are theoretically antisecretory the present study suggests they are unlikely to have clinically useful therapeutic actions.
-------------------------------------

10006985_234 - 0.893220773853 - medicine
[response, amygdalum, patient, treatment, emotion, sad, depressed, face, specific, remission, depressive, depression, negative, citalopram, antidepressant]

Increased amygdala responses to sad but not fearful faces in major depression: relation to mood state and pharmacological treatment.
OBJECTIVE: Increased amygdala response to negative emotions seen in functional MRI (fMRI) has been proposed as a biomarker for negative emotion processing bias underlying depressive symptoms and vulnerability to depressive relapse that are normalized by antidepressant drug treatment. The purpose of this study was to determine whether abnormal amygdala responses to face emotions in depression are related to specific emotions or change in response to antidepressant treatment and whether they are present as a stable trait in medication-free patients in remission. METHOD: Sixty-two medication-free unipolar depressed patients (38 were currently depressed, and 24 were in remission) and 54 healthy comparison subjects underwent an indirect face-emotion processing task during fMRI. Thirty-two currently depressed patients were treated with the antidepressant citalopram for 8 weeks. Adherence to treatment was evaluated by measuring citalopram plasma concentrations. RESULTS: Patients with current depression had increased bilateral amygdala responses specific to sad faces relative to healthy comparison subjects and nonmedicated patients in stable remission. Treatment with citalopram abolished the abnormal amygdala responses to sad faces in currently depressed patients but did not alter responses to fearful faces. CONCLUSIONS: Aberrant amygdala activation in response to sad facial emotions is specific to the depressed state and is a potential biomarker for a negative affective bias during a depressive episode.
-------------------------------------

10006968_234 - 0.716307162438 - science
[scn5a, mouse, node, aging, old, channel, effect]

TGF-β1-mediated fibrosis and ion channel remodeling are key mechanisms in producing the sinus node dysfunction associated with SCN5A deficiency and aging.
BACKGROUND: Mutations in the cardiac Na(+) channel gene (SCN5A) can adversely affect electric function in the heart, but effects can be age dependent. We explored the interacting effects of Scn5a disruption and aging on the pathogenesis of sinus node dysfunction in a heterozygous Scn5a knockout (Scn5a(+/-)) mouse model. METHODS AND RESULTS: We compared functional, histological, and molecular features in young (3 to 4 month) and old (1 year) wild type and Scn5a(+/-) mice. Both Scn5a disruption and aging were associated with decreased heart rate variability, reduced sinoatrial node automaticity, and slowed sinoatrial conduction. They also led to increased collagen and fibroblast levels and upregulated transforming growth factor-β(1) (TGF-β(1)) and vimentin transcripts, providing measures of fibrosis and reduced Nav1.5 expression. All these effects were most noticeable in old Scn5a(+/-) mice. Na(+) channel inhibition by Nav1.5-E3 antibody directly increased TGF-β(1) production in both cultured human cardiac myocytes and fibroblasts. Finally, aging was associated with downregulation of a wide range of ion channel and related transcripts and, again, was greatest in old Scn5a(+/-) mice. The quantitative results from these studies permitted computer simulations that successfully replicated the observed sinoatrial node phenotypes shown by the different experimental groups. CONCLUSIONS: These results implicate a tissue degeneration triggered by Nav1.5 deficiency manifesting as a TGF-β(1)-mediated fibrosis accompanied by electric remodeling in the sinus node dysfunction associated with Scn5a disruption or aging. The latter effects interact to produce the most severe phenotype in old Scn5a(+/-) mice. In demonstrating this, our findings suggest a novel regulatory role for Nav1.5 in cellular biological processes in addition to its electrophysiologic function.
-------------------------------------

10007278_234 - 0.929334033153 - science
[apoptosis, mouse, skin, role]

Role of Fas/Fas ligand-mediated apoptosis in murine contact hypersensitivity.
Apoptosis plays an important role in immune responses, but little is known about its involvement in contact hypersensitivity (CH). In this study, we have investigated the role of Fas/Fas ligand (FasL)-mediated apoptosis in the pathogenesis of CH. Mice were sensitized by one topical application of 100 microl of 3% oxazolone to shaved skin of the abdomen. Six days later, CH was provoked by challenging both sides of sensitized mouse right ear with 15 microl of 1% oxazolone. Using a DNA ladder assay, we found that apoptosis was induced in the skin of oxazolone-sensitized mice 24-96 h after allergen challenge. Annexin V-fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC)-propidium iodide (PI) apoptosis flow cytometric assay showed that early apoptotic CD4(+) T cells (annexin V-FITC(+)PI(-)), but not late apoptotic CD4(+) T cells (annexin V-FITC(+)PI(+)), increased in the inflamed skin of mice with CH. Moreover, the expressions of mRNAs for T helper (Th2) cytokine (interleukin (IL)-4), Th1 cytokine (interferon (IFN)-gamma) and proapoptotic molecules (Bax, Fas, FasL and IL-1beta-converting enzyme (ICE)/caspase-1) were significantly elevated in the oxazolone-sensitized mouse skin 6-72 h after allergen challenge. Dramatic increase in IL-10 mRNA was only observed in the sensitized mouse skin 6 and 12 h after allergen challenge. Furthermore, CH was significantly inhibited with decreased apoptosis and early apoptotic CD4(+) T cells in inflamed skin in Fas mutant lpr/lpr mice compared to wild-type mice, whereas there were no significant differences in IL-4, IFN-gamma, IL-10, Bax and ICE mRNAs in the inflamed skin of CH between lpr/lpr and wild-type mice. Our results thus suggest that Fas/FasL pathway partially contributes to apoptosis in murine CH and that Fas/FasL-mediated apoptosis plays a partial role in the development of CH. The contribution of Fas/FasL-mediated apoptosis to CH appears independent of Th1 and Th2 cytokines.
-------------------------------------

10005614_234 - 0.761006734804 - science
[cimetidine, pyrogastrone, oesophagitis, week, treated, subject]

Controlled trial of pyrogastrone and cimetidine in the treatment of reflux oesophagitis.
Eighty patients with reflux oesophagitis were randomised to receive either Pyrogastrone five tablets daily or cimetidine 400 mg twice daily for six weeks, extended to 12 if necessary. At six weeks, 49% of the Pyrogastrone treated subjects and 37% of the cimetidine treated subjects were healed. After 12 weeks the cumulative healing rates were 64% for Pyrogastrone and 66% for cimetidine. Compared with baseline both drugs achieved similarly significant improvements in symptom score, endoscopic and histological grading even in those who did not heal completely. Response was not related to length of symptoms or initial severity of oesophagitis. Eleven of 25 (44%) patients healed with Pyrogastrone relapsed within one year compared with 15 of 27 (56%) healed with cimetidine. Although this trend in favour of Pyrogastrone was not significant at one year the early relapse rate was significantly greater in cimetidine treated subjects. At six weeks, five cimetidine treated subjects had relapsed compared with none in the Pyrogastrone group (p = 0.05). This study shows that Pyrogastrone and cimetidine are equally effective in the healing of oesophagitis and raises the possibility that Pyrogastrone has marginal benefits in terms of time to relapse.
-------------------------------------

10005595_234 - 0.925725567244 - medicine
[patient, coronary, oesophageal, ventricular, psychiatric, dysfunction, disorder, angina, artery, pain, disease, chest]

Angina-like chest pain: a joint medical and psychiatric investigation.
Sixty three patients with chest pain typical of angina and who had normal coronary angiograms were investigated for left ventricular, oesophageal and psychiatric abnormalities. An additional 21 patients, age and sex matched, who had angina and significant coronary artery disease were also studied. Eighty six per cent of the 63 patients without evidence of coronary artery disease could be demonstrated to have a physical abnormality (left ventricular dysfunction in 35%, oesophageal disorder 51%). There was, however, a wide variation in the incidence of psychiatric morbidity between the diagnostic subgroups-18% in left ventricular dysfunction, 29% in those with coronary artery disease and 59% in patients with oesophageal disorders (P less than 0.01). Thus failure to identify left ventricular dysfunction and inclusion of such subjects in psychological assessments of 'angiogram-negative' chest pain might give misleading results. This study confirms that patients with angina and normal coronary angiography have a high incidence of oesophageal disorders. However psychiatric illness is also common in this group of subjects and management needs to take both these factors into account.
-------------------------------------

10006996_234 - 0.828464904458 - science
[nmr, modulation]

Spin echo NMR spectra without J modulation
The spin echo is the single most important building block in modern NMR spectroscopy, but echo modulation by scalar couplings J can severely complicate its use. We show for the first time that a general but unacknowledged solution to such complications already exists.
-------------------------------------

10006910_234 - 0.869651375152 - science
[apc, platelet, monocyte, differentiation, pf-4, il-4, pfapc, cell]

Platelet factor 4 in conjunction with IL-4 directs differentiation of human monocytes into specialized antigen-presenting cells.
Recent evidence suggests that platelets are not only involved in haemostatic processes but also modulate immune responses. As antigen-presenting cells (APC) are of crucial importance for the regulation of immunity, in this study we wanted to define the role of platelet factor 4 (PF-4) as one of the major platelet-derived chemokines on the transition of monocytes into APCs. Our experiments show that within 3 days PF-4 in conjunction with IL-4 induces a rapid differentiation of monocytes into APC. These PFAPC (PF-4/IL-4 differentiated APC) display unique phenotypical and functional characteristics setting them apart from macrophages and conventional dendritic cells. Functional studies revealed that PFAPC preferentially stimulated proliferation of lymphocytes and lytic NK activity while they induced only moderate cytokine responses. Beyond day 3 of differentiation, PFAPC became less immunostimulatory and maintained their capacity to phagocytose particulate material even after LPS-induced maturation. These experiments uncover a previously unknown role for the platelet-derived CXC-chemokine PF-4 in differentiation of human APC. Our data further support the newly discovered function of platelets in immunomodulation and provide new evidence for a rapid transition of monocytes into APC under the influence of inflammatory stimuli.
-------------------------------------

10006780_234 - 0.797275104796 - science
[pulsar, frequency, survey, galactic]

A 6.5-GHz multibeam pulsar survey
A survey of the Galactic plane in the region -60{\deg}{\le}l{\le} 30{\deg},|b| {\le} 0?25 was carried out using the seven-beam Parkes methanolmultibeam (MMB) receiver, which operates at a frequency of 6.5 GHz.Three pulsars were discovered and 16 previously known pulsars detected.In this paper we present two previously unpublished discoveries, bothwith extremely high dispersion measures, one of which is very close, inangular distance, to the Galactic Centre. The survey data also containthe first known detection, at radio frequencies, of the radio magnetarPSR J1550-5418. Our survey observation was made 46 d prior to thatpreviously published and places constraints on the beginning of pulsedradio emission from the source.The detection of only three previously undiscovered pulsars argues thatthere are few pulsars in the direction of the inner Galaxy whose fluxdensity spectrum is governed by a flat power law. However, these pulsarswould be likely to remain undetected at lower frequencies due to thelarge amount of scatter broadening which affects pulsars with highvalues of dispersion measure. Surveys with future telescopes at highobserving frequencies will therefore play an important role in thediscovery of pulsars at the Galactic Centre. By simulating pulsarsurveys of the Galaxy with phase-1 Square Kilometer Array at frequenciesof 1.4 and 10 GHz, we find that high-frequency observations are the onlyway to discover and observe the Galactic-Centre pulsar population.
-------------------------------------

10006859_234 - 0.776241600791 - science
[gw, pulsar, measurement, binary, distance, timing, accuracy, yr]

Gravitational wave astronomy of single sources with a pulsar timing array
The stability of radio millisecond pulsars as celestial clocks allows for the possibility to detect and study the properties of gravitational waves (GWs) when the received pulses are timed jointly in a 'Pulsar Timing Array' (PTA) experiment. Here, we investigate the potential of detecting the GW from individual binary black hole systems using PTAs and calculate the accuracy for determining the GW properties. This is done in a consistent analysis, which at the same time accounts for the measurement of the pulsar distances via the timing parallax. We find that, at low redshift, a PTA is able to detect the nano-hertz GW from super-massive black hole binary systems with masses of ??108-1010 Msun less than ??105 yrs before the final merger. Binaries with more than ??103-104 yr before merger are effectively monochromatic GW, and those with less than ??103-104 yr before merger may allow us to detect the evolution of binaries. For our findings, we derive an analytical expression to describe the accuracy of a pulsar distance measurement via timing parallax. We consider 5 yr of bi-weekly observations at a precision of 15 ns for close-by (??0.5-1 kpc) pulsars. Timing 20 pulsars would allow us to detect a GW source with an amplitude larger than 5 ?? 10-17. We calculate the corresponding GW and binary orbital parameters and their measurement precision. The accuracy of measuring the binary orbital inclination angle, the sky position and the GW frequency is calculated as functions of the GW amplitude. We note that the 'pulsar term', which is commonly regarded as noise, is essential for obtaining an accurate measurement for the GW source location. We also show that utilizing the information encoded in the GW signal passing the Earth also increases the accuracy of pulsar distance measurements. If the GW is strong enough, one can achieve sub-parsec distance measurements for nearby pulsars with distance less than ??0.5-1 kpc.
-------------------------------------

10005680_234 - 0.80516816225 - medicine
[syndrome, ibs, symptom, patient]

Nongastrointestinal disorders in the irritable bowel syndrome.
A large proportion of irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) patients also complain of other functional disorders, such as headache, noncardiac chest pain, low back pain, and dysuria. Some of these features, particularly headache, may have a negative influence on the outcome of IBS. In a large proportion of female IBS patients, sexual intercourse triggers the symptoms, and frequently IBS symptoms exacerbate during menses. These gynecological-type symptoms often mislead the patients to the gynecological clinic, which may imply unnecessary investigations and inappropriate treatments. The diagnostic criteria of the fibromyalgia syndrome include IBS, and hence, the apparent relationship of both syndromes is difficult to analyze. On the other hand, no convincing evidence has been produced to date to sustain an association between IBS and the chronic fatigue syndrome.
-------------------------------------

100058_102 - 0.723384600095 - technology_and_computing
[sound, design, product, inter-disciplinary, field]

Product Sound Design:  An Inter-Disciplinary Approach?
<p>The practice of product sound design is relatively new within the field of product development. Consequently, the responsibilities and the role of a (sound) designer are not very clear. However, practice shows that various disciplines such as design engineering, acoustics, psychoacoustics, psychology, and musicology contribute to the improvement of product sounds. We propose that sound design should be conducted by experts who have knowledge in the afore-mentioned fields. In other words, we suggest that product sound design should be an independent field that encompasses an inter-disciplinary approach. 
</p>
<p>
<strong>Keywords:</strong> <br />
sound design; sound designer; product sounds; design processes; multi-disciplinary, inter-disciplinary</p>
-------------------------------------

10005690_234 - 0.833366454495 - science
[disease, crohn, antibody, coeliac]

Antibodies to maize in patients with Crohn's disease, ulcerative colitis and coeliac disease.
The incidence of antibodies to maize using an immunofluorescent technique has been found to be 14% in controls, 33% in Crohn's disease, 50% in ulcerative colitis and 44% in coeliac disease. This result indicates that humoral immunity to maize is probably unimportant in the pathogenesis of Crohn's disease. The similar incidence of antibodies in the inflammatory bowel disease and coeliac groups suggests absorption of dietary antigen secondary to an increased mucosal permeability.
-------------------------------------

10006786_234 - 0.824373897063 - science
[millisecond, pulsar, source, discovery, fermi]

Discovery of Two Millisecond Pulsars in Fermi Sources with the Nan{\c c}ay Radio Telescope
We report the discovery of two millisecond pulsars in a search for radiopulsations at the positions of Fermi-Large Area Telescope sources withno previously known counterparts, using the Nan{\c c}ay RadioTelescope. The two millisecond pulsars, PSRs J2017+0603 and J2302+4442,have rotational periods of 2.896 and 5.192 ms and are both in binarysystems with low-eccentricity orbits and orbital periods of 2.2 and125.9 days, respectively, suggesting long recycling processes. Gamma-raypulsations were subsequently detected for both objects, indicating thatthey power the associated Fermi sources in which they were found. Thegamma-ray light curves and spectral properties are similar to those ofpreviously detected gamma-ray millisecond pulsars. Detailed modeling ofthe observed radio and gamma-ray light curves shows that the gamma-rayemission seems to originate at high altitudes in their magnetospheres.Additionally, X-ray observations revealed the presence of an X-raysource at the position of PSR J2302+4442, consistent with thermalemission from a neutron star. These discoveries along with the numerousdetections of radio-loud millisecond pulsars in gamma rays suggest thatmany Fermi sources with no known counterpart could be unknownmillisecond pulsars.
-------------------------------------

10007018_234 - 0.726979800443 - science
[aerosol, model, borneo, organic, aod, region]

The composition and variability of atmospheric aerosol over Southeast Asia during 2008
We use a nested version of the GEOS-Chem global 3-D chemistry transport model to better understand the composition and variation of aerosol over Borneo and the broader Southeast Asian region in conjunction with aircraft and satellite observations. Our focus on Southeast Asia reflects the importance of this region as a source of reactive organic gases and aerosols from natural forests, biomass burning, and food and fuel crops. We particularly focus on July 2008 when the UK BAe-146 research aircraft was deployed over northern Malaysian Borneo as part of the ACES/OP3 measurement campaign. During July 2008 we find using the model that Borneo (defined as Borneo Island and the surrounding Indonesian islands) was a net exporter of primary organic aerosol (42 kT) and black carbon aerosol (11 kT). We find only 13\% of volatile organic compound oxidation products partition to secondary organic aerosol (SOA), with Borneo being a net exporter of SOA (15 kT). SOA represents approximately 19\% of the total organic aerosol over the region. Sulphate is mainly from aqueous-phase oxidation (68\%), with smaller contributions from gas-phase oxidation (15\%) and advection into the regions (14\%). We find that there is a large source of sea salt, as expected, but this largely deposits within the region; we find that dust aerosol plays only a relatively small role in the aerosol burden. In contrast to coincident surface measurements over Northern Borneo that find a pristine environment with evidence for substantial biogenic SOA formation we find that the free troposphere is influenced by biomass burning aerosol transported from the northwest of the Island and further afield. We find several transport events during July 2008 over Borneo associated with elevated aerosol concentrations, none of which coincide with the aircraft flights. We use MODIS aerosol optical depths (AOD) data and the model to put the July campaign into a longer temporal perspective. We find that Borneo is where the model has the least skill at reproducing the data, where the model has a negative bias of 76\% and only captures 14\% of the observed variability. This model performance reflects the small-scale island-marine environment and the mix of aerosol species, with the model showing more skill at reproducing observed AOD over larger continental regions such as China where AOD is dominated by one aerosol type. The model shows that AOD over Borneo is approximately evenly split between organic and sulphate aerosol with sea salt representing 10-20\% during May-September; we find a similar breakdown over continental Southeast Asia but with less sea salt aerosol and more dust aerosol. In contrast, East China AOD is determined mainly by sulphate aerosol and a seasonal source of dust aerosol, as expected. Realistic sensitivity runs, designed to test our underlying assumptions about emissions and chemistry over Borneo, show that model AOD is most sensitive to isoprene emissions and organic gas-phase partitioning but all fail to improve significantly upon the control model calculation. This emphasises the multi-faceted dimension of the problem and the need for concurrent and coordinated development of BVOC emissions, and BVOC chemistry and organic aerosol formation mechanisms.
-------------------------------------

10006964_234 - 0.808660027335 - science
[tissue, d172n, re-entry, model, kir2, re-entrant, vulnerability, excitation, ventricular, mutant, mutation]

Proarrhythmia in KCNJ2-linked short QT syndrome: insights from modelling.
AIMS: One form of the short QT syndrome (SQT3) has been linked to the D172N gain-in-function mutation to Kir2.1, which preferentially increases outward current through channels responsible for inward rectifier K(+) current (I(K1)). This study investigated mechanisms by which the Kir2.1 D172N mutation facilitates and perpetuates ventricular arrhythmias. METHODS AND RESULTS: The ten Tusscher et al. model for human ventricular action potentials (APs) was modified to incorporate changes to I(K1) based on experimentally observed changes to Kir2.1 function: both heterozygous (WT-D172N) and homozygous (D172N) mutant scenarios were studied. Cell models were incorporated into heterogeneous one-dimensional (1D), 2D tissue, and 3D models to compute the restitution curves of AP duration (APD-R), effective refractory period (ERP-R), and conduction velocity (CV). Temporal and spatial vulnerability of ventricular tissue to re-entry was measured and dynamic behaviour of re-entrant excitation waves (lifespan and dominant frequency) in 2D and 3D models of the human ventricle was characterized. D172N 'mutant' I(K1) led to abbreviated APD and ERP, as well as steeper APD-R and ERP-R curves. It reduced tissue excitability at low excitation rates but increased it at high rates. It increased tissue temporal vulnerability for initiating re-entry, but reduced the minimal substrate size necessary to sustain re-entry. SQT3 'mutant' I(K1) also stabilized and accelerated re-entrant excitation waves, leading to sustained rapid re-entry. CONCLUSION: Increased I(K1) due to the Kir2.1 D172N mutation increases arrhythmia risk due to increased tissue vulnerability, shortened ERP, and altered excitability, which in combination facilitate initiation and maintenance of re-entrant circuits.
-------------------------------------

10006875_234 - 0.844874788262 - science
[pulsar, psr, datum, egret]

Fermi Large Area Telescope Observations of Gamma-ray Pulsars PSR J1057-5226, J1709-4429, and J1952+3252
The Fermi Large Area Telescope (LAT) data have confirmed the pulsedemission from all six high-confidence gamma-ray pulsars previously knownfrom the EGRET observations. We report results obtained from theanalysis of 13 months of LAT data for three of these pulsars (PSRJ1057-5226, PSR J1709-4429, and PSR J1952+3252) each of which had someunique feature among the EGRET pulsars. The excellent sensitivity of LATallows more detailed analysis of the evolution of the pulse profile withenergy and also of the variation of the spectral shape with phase. Wemeasure the cutoff energy of the pulsed emission from these pulsars forthe first time and provide a more complete picture of the emissionmechanism. The results confirm some, but not all, of the features seenin the EGRET data.
-------------------------------------

10005666_234 - 0.930000223225 - medicine
[5-httlpr, ibs-d, patient, polymorphism, ibs-c, female, stin2, genotype, sex, frequency]

5-HTTLPR and STin2 polymorphisms in the serotonin transporter gene and irritable bowel syndrome: effect of bowel habit and sex.
BACKGROUND: Conflicting data exist on the association between functional polymorphisms in the serotonin reuptake transporter (SERT) gene (SLC6A4) and irritable bowel syndrome (IBS). This may be partly because of small participant numbers and varying ethnic origin and sex within the cohorts studied. AIM: To reassess the potential association between the SERT polymorphisms 5-HTTLPR and STin2 in both male and female IBS patients with diarrhoea (IBS-D) and constipation (IBS-C) compared with healthy volunteers. METHODS: In this case-control study, 196 Caucasian Rome II IBS patients 97 IBS-D (aged 18-66 years; 67 female) and 99 IBS-C (aged 18-65 years; 95 female) and 92 Caucasian healthy volunteers (aged 18-63 years; 60 female) from the UK had genomic DNA extracted from peripheral blood and the 5-HTTLPR and STin2 polymorphisms genotyped. RESULTS: The frequency of the 5-HTTLPR (ss) genotype was slightly lower in both IBS-D (16.5%) and IBS-C (14.3%) patients compared with controls (23.9%), although not significantly (P<or=0.191). This seemed to be related to a reduction in the frequency of the 5-HTTLPR (ss) genotype in male patients, particularly those with IBS-D IBS-D 10%, IBS-C 25%, controls 37.5%; P=0.01 for IBS-D vs. controls; odds ratio (95% confidence interval) for 5-HTTLPR (ss) vs. 5-HTTLPR (non-ss)=0.185 (0.046-0.744) than in female patients (IBS-D 19.4%, IBS-C 13.8%, controls 16.7%). There were no differences in the frequencies of either the 5-HTTLPR (ll) or (ls), or STin2 genotypes between any of the three groups. CONCLUSION: Our finding that male IBS-D patients have a reduced frequency of the 5-HTTLPR (ss) genotype contradicts three earlier studies of a similar size, which did not take sex into account. Therefore, replication studies in even larger cohorts, stratifying for sex and endophenotypes, after assessing physiological and psychological traits, are required to unravel the contribution of SERT polymorphisms to the IBS phenotype.
-------------------------------------

10007003_234 - 0.817450179949 - food_and_drink
[food, allergy, effective, safe, treatment, fish, peach, immunotherapy]

FAST: Towards safe and effective subcutaneous immunotherapy of persistent life-threatening food allergies.
ABSTRACT: The FAST project (Food Allergy Specific Immunotherapy) aims at the development of safe and effective treatment of food allergies, targeting prevalent, persistent and severe allergy to fish and peach. Classical allergen-specific immunotherapy (SIT), using subcutaneous injections with aqueous food extracts may be effective but has proven to be accompanied by too many anaphylactic side-effects. FAST aims to develop a safe alternative by replacing food extracts with hypoallergenic recombinant major allergens as the active ingredients of SIT. Both severe fish and peach allergy are caused by a single major allergen, parvalbumin (Cyp c 1) and lipid transfer protein (Pru p 3), respectively. Two approaches are being evaluated for achieving hypoallergenicity, i.e. site-directed mutagenesis and chemical modification. The most promising hypoallergens will be produced under GMP conditions. After pre-clinical testing (toxicology testing and efficacy in mouse models), SCIT with alum-absorbed hypoallergens will be evaluated in phase I/IIa and IIb randomized double-blind placebo-controlled (DBPC) clinical trials, with the DBPC food challenge as primary read-out. To understand the underlying immune mechanisms in depth serological and cellular immune analyses will be performed, allowing identification of novel biomarkers for monitoring treatment efficacy. FAST aims at improving the quality of life of food allergic patients by providing a safe and effective treatment that will significantly lower their threshold for fish or peach intake, thereby decreasing their anxiety and dependence on rescue medication.
-------------------------------------

10007186_234 - 0.702550150178 - science
[method, modulus, pile, test, load, concrete]

Critical assessment of pile modulus determination methods
The elastic modulus of a concrete pile is an important parameter for the interpretation of load test results. This paper summarizes and assesses the methods available for its determination. Ten methods have been identified of which four are based on laboratory tests and the remainder on in situ pile instrumentation. Six of the methods have been used to interpret the modulus of a concrete pile subject to an axial load test. From the analyses, it was found that creep strains that developed during load-holding periods can have a significant effect on the modulus value if not allowed for when assessing the measured strain values. Based on a comparison of the derived pile loads the secant modulus method was found to be the most satisfactory. The tangent modulus method was also found to be a useful tool for investigating the effect of a partial steel casing — a feature of the method that has not been discussed before. Surprisingly, the theoretically correct transformed area equation had the worst performance, probably because of the chosen method for obtaining the concrete specimens on site.
-------------------------------------

10006976_234 - 0.825274696217 - science
[ert, sulfate, plasma, level, urinary, patient, heparan, concentration, dermatan, total, urine, ugag, gag]

Plasma and urinary levels of dermatan sulfate and heparan sulfate derived disaccharides after long-term enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) in MPS I: correlation with the timing of ERT and with total urinary excretion of glycosaminoglycans.
INTRODUCTION: Mucopolysaccharidosis type I (MPS I) results in a defective breakdown of the glycosaminoglycans (GAGs) heparan sulfate and dermatan sulfate, which leads to a progressive disease. Enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) results in clearance of these GAGs from a range of tissues and can significantly ameliorate several symptoms. The biochemical efficacy of ERT is generally assessed by the determination of the total urinary excretion of GAGs. However, this has limitations. We studied the concentrations of heparan sulfate and dermatan sulfate derived disaccharides (HS and DS, respectively) in the plasma and urine of seven patients and compared these levels with total urinary GAGs (uGAGs) levels. METHODS: Plasma and urine samples were collected at different time points relative to the weekly ERT for three non-consecutive weeks in seven MPS I patients who had been treated with ERT for at least 2.5 years. Heparan and dermatan sulfate in plasma and urine were enzymatically digested into disaccharides, and HS and DS levels were determined by HPLC-MS/MS analysis. uGAGs were measured by the DMB test. RESULTS: The levels of HS and DS were markedly decreased compared with the levels before the initiation of ERT. However, the concentrations of DS in plasma and of both HS and DS in urine remained significantly elevated in all studied patients, while in six patients the level of total uGAGs had normalized. The concentrations of plasma and urinary HS during the weekly ERT followed a U-shaped curve. However, the effect size is small. The concentrations of plasma and urinary DS and uGAGs appeared to be in a steady state. CONCLUSIONS: HS and DS are sensitive biomarkers for monitoring the biochemical treatment efficacy of ERT and remain elevated despite long-term treatment. This finding may be related to the labeled dose or antibody status of the patient. The timing of the sample collection is not relevant, at least at the current dose of 100 IU/kg/weekly.
-------------------------------------

10006901_234 - 0.819993557433 - science
[cell, mast, innate, response, adaptive]

Mast cells in allergy: innate instructors of adaptive responses.
The function of mast cells as effector cells in allergy has been extensively studied. However, increasing insight into mast cell physiology has revealed new mast cell functions and has introduced mast cells as key players in the regulation of innate as well as adaptive immunity. For example, mast cells have recently been found to express Toll-like receptors (TLRs), which enable them to participate in the innate immune response against pathogens. Furthermore, mast cells have been reported to interact with B cells, dendritic cells and T cells and thereby modulate the direction of an adaptive immune response. Finally, recent documentation that mast cells express functional MHC class II and costimulatory molecules and release immunologically active exosomes, has raised the possibility that mast cells also engage in (as yet) poorly understood antigen presentation functions. In this review, we explore the hypothesis that mast cells serve as central mediators between innate and adaptive immunity, rather as pure effector cells, during allergic innate responses.
-------------------------------------

10005598_234 - 0.879395290842 - medicine
[ispaghulum, placebo, bowel, patient, syndrome, transit, time, group, irritable]

Double blind study of ispaghula in irritable bowel syndrome.
A double blind placebo controlled trial of ispaghula husk in 80 patients with irritable bowel syndrome is reported. Global assessment judged treatment to be satisfactory in 82% of patients receiving ispaghula and 53% of the placebo group (p less than 0.02). Bowel habit was unchanged in the placebo group, while constipation significantly improved in patients taking ispaghula (p = 0.026). Transit time decreased significantly in those taking ispaghula compared with placebo (p = 0.001), especially in patients with initially high transit times. Abdominal pain and bloating improved in both groups, with no significant differences between ispaghula and placebo. Four of the eight withdrawals on ispaghula and 10 of the 15 withdrawals on placebo were because of treatment failure. Ispaghula significantly improves overall well being in patients with irritable bowel syndrome, and in those with constipation favourably affects bowel habit and transit time.
-------------------------------------

10007064_234 - 0.812940829044 - food_and_drink
[intake, acid, risk, scc, omega-6, fatty, bcc, omega-3, rr, ci, incidence, skin, association]

Intake of Omega-3 and Omega-6 Fatty Acids and Risk of Basal and Squamous Cell Carcinomas of the Skin: A Longitudinal Community-Based Study in Australian Adults.
Intake of omega-3 and omega-6 fatty acids may modify the risk of basal and squamous cell carcinoma of the skin (BCC and SCC), but population-based evidence is limited and inconsistent. We examined prospectively associations between intake of omega-3 and omega-6 fatty acids estimated from food frequency questionnaires and BCC and SCC incidence among 1322 randomly selected adults in Nambour, Australia. Relative risks (RR) and 95% confidence intervals (CI) were estimated based on histologically confirmed tumors diagnosed between 1997 and 2007. Incidence of BCC was lowest in the middle third of both total omega-6 intake (RR(mv.adj) = 0.74, 95% CI = 0.56-0.97) and linoleic acid intake (RR(mv.adj) = 0.75, 95% CI = 0.57-0.99) compared with the lowest third of intake. Evidence for associations with SCC was weak, though persons with arachidonic acid intake in the middle third had a marginally increased risk of SCC (RR(mv.adj) = 1.42, 95% CI = 1.00-2.02). Consumption of omega-3 fatty acids was not associated with subsequent skin cancer risk. Suggestion that intake of arachidonic acid may be associated with increased SCC incidence and total omega-6 with reduced BCC from our study is still highly uncertain and may be due to chance. These data do not support an association between these fatty acids and risk of BCC or SCC.
-------------------------------------

10007014_234 - 0.792861651089 - science
[ice, cloud, particle, concentration, model, high, process]

Ice formation and development in aged, wintertime cumulus over the UK: observations and modelling
In situ high resolution aircraft measurements of cloud microphysical properties were made in coordination with ground based remote sensing observations of a line of small cumulus clouds, using Radar and Lidar, as part of the Aerosol Properties, PRocesses And InfluenceS on the Earth's climate (APPRAISE) project. A narrow but extensive line (similar to 100 km long) of shallow convective clouds over the southern UK was studied. Cloud top temperatures were observed to be higher than -8 A degrees C, but the clouds were seen to consist of supercooled droplets and varying concentrations of ice particles. No ice particles were observed to be falling into the cloud tops from above. Current parameterisations of ice nuclei (IN) numbers predict too few particles will be active as ice nuclei to account for ice particle concentrations at the observed, near cloud top, temperatures (-7.5 A degrees C). The role of mineral dust particles, consistent with concentrations observed near the surface, acting as high temperature IN is considered important in this case. It was found that very high concentrations of ice particles (up to 100 L-1) could be produced by secondary ice particle production providing the observed small amount of primary ice (about 0.01 L-1) was present to initiate it. This emphasises the need to understand primary ice formation in slightly supercooled clouds. It is shown using simple calculations that the Hallett-Mossop process (HM) is the likely source of the secondary ice. Model simulations of the case study were performed with the Aerosol Cloud and Precipitation Interactions Model (ACPIM). These parcel model investigations confirmed the HM process to be a very important mechanism for producing the observed high ice concentrations. A key step in generating the high concentrations was the process of collision and coalescence of rain drops, which once formed fell rapidly through the cloud, collecting ice particles which caused them to freeze and form instant large riming particles. The broadening of the droplet size-distribution by collision-coalescence was, therefore, a vital step in this process as this was required to generate the large number of ice crystals observed in the time available. Simulations were also performed with the WRF (Weather, Research and Forecasting) model. The results showed that while HM does act to increase the mass and number concentration of ice particles in these model simulations it was not found to be critical for the formation of precipitation. However, the WRF simulations produced a cloud top that was too cold and this, combined with the assumption of continual replenishing of ice nuclei removed by ice crystal formation, resulted in too many ice crystals forming by primary nucleation compared to the observations and parcel modelling.
-------------------------------------

10006960_234 - 0.867350502967 - science
[model, tissue, mutation, ventricular, n588k, re-entrant, transmural, wave]

Increased vulnerability of human ventricle to re-entrant excitation in hERG-linked variant 1 short QT syndrome.
The short QT syndrome (SQTS) is a genetically heterogeneous condition characterized by abbreviated QT intervals and an increased susceptibility to arrhythmia and sudden death. This simulation study identifies arrhythmogenic mechanisms in the rapid-delayed rectifier K(+) current (I(Kr))-linked SQT1 variant of the SQTS. Markov chain (MC) models were found to be superior to Hodgkin-Huxley (HH) models in reproducing experimental data regarding effects of the N588K mutation on KCNH2-encoded hERG. These ionic channel models were then incorporated into human ventricular action potential (AP) models and into 1D and 2D idealised and realistic transmural ventricular tissue simulations and into a 3D anatomical model. In single cell models, the N588K mutation abbreviated ventricular cell AP duration at 90% repolarization (APD(90)) and decreased the maximal transmural voltage heterogeneity (δV) during APs. This resulted in decreased transmural heterogeneity of APD(90) and of the effective refractory period (ERP): effects that are anticipated to be anti-arrhythmic rather than pro-arrhythmic. However, with consideration of transmural heterogeneity of I(Kr) density in the intact tissue model based on the ten Tusscher-Noble-Noble-Panfilov ventricular model, not only did the N588K mutation lead to QT-shortening and increases in T-wave amplitude, but δV was found to be augmented in some local regions of ventricle tissue, resulting in increased tissue vulnerability for uni-directional conduction block and predisposing to formation of re-entrant excitation waves. In 2D and 3D tissue models, the N588K mutation facilitated and maintained re-entrant excitation waves due to the reduced substrate size necessary for sustaining re-entry. Thus, in SQT1 the N588K-hERG mutation facilitates initiation and maintenance of ventricular re-entry, increasing the lifespan of re-entrant spiral waves and the stability of scroll waves in 3D tissue.
-------------------------------------

10005588_234 - 0.923535301485 - medicine
[patient, reflux, ph, exertional, normal, gastro-oesophageal, hour, oesophageal, exercise, score, pectoris, angiogram, symptom, angina, testing, coronary]

Exertional gastro-oesophageal reflux: a mechanism for symptoms in patients with angina pectoris and normal coronary angiograms.
During 24 hour oesophageal pH monitoring 52 patients who had angina pectoris and normal coronary angiograms underwent exercise testing, as far as their symptoms allowed, on a treadmill to determine whether gastro-oesophageal reflux occurred during exertion. In 11 patients the 24 hour oesophageal pH score was abnormally high; 10 of these showed exertional gastro-oesophageal reflux, and in nine this was associated with their usual chest pain. A further 13 patients had a normal 24 hour pH score but had exertional reflux coincident with chest pain during exercise testing. The mean lower oesophageal sphincter pressure in both of these groups of patients was appreciably lower than that in 28 patients who had a normal 24 hour pH score and no exertional reflux. These findings suggest that exertional gastro-oesophageal reflux accounts for the symptoms of a large proportion of patients who have angina pectoris and normal coronary angiograms and that oesophageal pH monitoring during exercise testing on a treadmill enables this group of patients to be identified.
-------------------------------------

10006909_234 - 0.855680178466 - science
[cell, tlr, mast, ligand, signaling]

TLR signaling in mast cells: common and unique features.
In addition to the well known role of mast cells in immunity to multi-cellular parasites and in the pathogenesis of allergy and asthma, the importance of mast cells in the immune defense against bacteria and viruses is increasingly being recognized. Their location in the skin, gut, and airways puts mast cells in an ideal location to encounter and respond to pathogens, and in order to perform this function, these cells express a variety of pattern recognition receptors, including Toll-like receptors (TLRs). Mast cells respond to TLR ligands by secreting cytokines, chemokines, and lipid mediators, and some studies have found that TLR ligands can also cause degranulation, although this finding is contentious. In addition, stimulation via TLR ligands can synergize with signaling via the FcεRI, potentially enhancing the response of the cells to antigen in vivo. A great deal is now known about TLR signaling pathways. Some features of these pathways are cell type-specific, however, and work is under way to fully elucidate the TLR signaling cascades in the mast cell. Already, some interesting differences have been identified. This review aims to address what is known about the responses of mast cells to TLR ligands and the signaling pathways involved. Given the location of mast cells at sites exposed to the environment, the response of these cells to TLR ligands must be carefully regulated. The known mechanisms behind this regulation are also reviewed here.
-------------------------------------

10006969_234 - 0.744124694026 - science
[model, tissue, electrical, action, atrium, atrial, remodelling, wave, normal, effect, spiral, homogenous]

Virtual tissue engineering of the human atrium: modelling pharmacological actions on atrial arrhythmogenesis.
Computational models of human atrial cells, tissues and atria have been developed. Cell models, for atrial wall, crista terminalis, appendage, Bachmann's bundle and pectinate myocytes are characterised by action potentials, ionic currents and action potential duration (APD) restitution. The principal effect of the ion channel remodelling of persistent atrial fibrillation (AF), and a mutation producing familial AF, was APD shortening at all rates. Electrical alternans was abolished by the modelled action of Dronedarone. AF induced gap junctional remodelling slows propagation velocity at all rates. Re-entrant spiral waves in 2-D models are characterised by their frequency, wavelength, meander and stability. For homogenous models of normal tissue, spiral waves self-terminate, due to meander to inexcitable boundaries, and by dissipation of excitation. AF electrical remodelling in these homogenous models led to persistence of spiral waves, and AF fibrotic remodelling to their breakdown into fibrillatory activity. An anatomical model of the atria was partially validated by the activation times of normal sinus rhythm. The use of tissue geometry from clinical MRI, and tissue anisotropy from ex vivo diffusion tensor magnetic resonance imaging is outlined. In the homogenous model of normal atria, a single scroll breaks down onto spatio-temporal irregularity (electrical fibrillation) that is self-terminating; while in the AF remodelled atria the fibrillatory activity is persistent. The persistence of electrical AF can be dissected in the model in terms of ion channel and intercellular coupling processes, that can be modified pharmacologically; the effects of anatomy, that can be modified by ablation; and the permanent effects of fibrosis, that need to be prevented.
-------------------------------------

10005641_234 - 0.821360929556 - medicine
[bowel, irritable, syndrome, patient, urological, prevalence, symptom, male, female]

High prevalence of irritable bowel syndrome in patients attending urological outpatient departments.
Irritable bowel syndrome patients often complain of urinary symptoms such as frequency, urgency, and dysuria, raising the possibility of inappropriate referral to the urologist. To resolve this issue, the prevalence of irritable bowel syndrome was compared in patients attending urological and control clinics (dermatology and ENT). The overall prevalence of irritable bowel syndrome was 31.2% in the urological clinic compared with 21.2% in the controls (P < 0.001), but striking, differences emerged, depending on presenting complaint. Irritable bowel symptoms were particularly common in patients presenting with loin pain (male: 40.9%, P = 0.004; female: 50%, P = 0.03), dysuria (male: 43.8%, P = 0.007; female: 46.2%, P = 0.01) and frequency/urgency (male: 31.7%, P = 0.002; female: 42.4%, P = 0.006), and the male/female prevalence was 24% and 44%. These results suggest that in irritable bowel syndrome, urinary symptoms including loin pain can present diagnostic dilemmas in both the gastroenterological and urological setting, underlining the importance of specialists in these fields working together in order to define better ways of managing such patients.
-------------------------------------

10007270_234 - 0.817441734429 - science
[cell, il-15, cd44, cd8, low, high, il-15r]

IL-15 promotes the survival of naive and memory phenotype CD8+ T cells.
IL-15 stimulates the proliferation of memory phenotype CD44(high)CD8(+) T cells and is thought to play a key role in regulating the turnover of these cells in vivo. We have investigated whether IL-15 also has the capacity to affect the life span of naive phenotype (CD44(low)) CD8(+) T cells. We report that IL-15 promotes the survival of both CD44(low) and CD44(high) CD8(+) T cells, doing so at much lower concentrations than required to induce proliferation of CD44(high) cells. Rescue from apoptosis was associated with the up-regulation of Bcl-2 in both cell types, whereas elevated expression of Bcl-x(L) was observed among CD44(high) but not CD44(low) CD8(+) cells. An investigation into the role of IL-15R subunits in mediating the effects of IL-15 revealed distinct contributions of the alpha- and beta- and gamma-chains. Most strikingly, IL-15R alpha was not essential for either induction of proliferation or promotion of survival by IL-15, but did greatly enhance the sensitivity of cells to low concentrations of IL-15. By contrast, the beta- and gamma-chains of the IL-15R were absolutely required for the proliferative and pro-survival effects of IL-15, although it was not necessary for CD44(high)CD8(+) cells to express higher levels of IL-15R beta than CD44(low) cells to proliferate in response to IL-15. These results show that IL-15 has multiple effects on CD8 T cells and possesses the potential to regulate the life span of naive as well as memory CD8(+) T cells.
-------------------------------------

10006916_234 - 0.817441734429 - science
[ikdc, cell, il-15, trans-presentation]

Trans-presentation of IL-15 dictates IFN-producing killer dendritic cells effector functions.
IFN-producing killer dendritic cells (IKDC) were initially described as B220(+)CD11c(+)CD3(-)NK1.1(+) tumor-infiltrating cells that mediated part of the antitumor effects of the combination therapy with imatinib mesylate and IL-2. In this study, we show their functional dependency on IL-15 during homeostasis and inflammatory processes. Trans-presentation of IL-15 by IL-15Ralpha allows dramatic expansion of IKDC in vitro and in vivo, licenses IKDC for TRAIL-dependent killing and endows IKDC with immunizing potential, all three biological attributes not shared by B220(-)NK cells. However, IL-15 down-regulates the capacity of IKDC to induce MHC class I- or II-restricted T cell activation in vitro. Trans-presentation of IL-15 by IL-15Ralpha allows IKDC to respond to TLR3 and TLR4 ligands for the production of CCL2, a chemokine that is critical for IKDC trafficking into tumor beds (as described recently). We conclude that IKDC represent a unique subset of innate effectors functionally distinguishable from conventional NK cells in their ability to promptly respond to IL-15-driven inflammatory processes.
-------------------------------------

10006897_234 - 0.745962278076 - science
[cell, response, ifn-alphabeta, cd8, cross-priming, il-15, stimulation]

Direct stimulation of T cells by type I IFN enhances the CD8+ T cell response during cross-priming.
Type I IFN (IFN-alphabeta), which is produced rapidly in response to infection, plays a key role in innate immunity and also acts as a stimulus for the adaptive immune response. We have investigated how IFN-alphabeta induces cross-priming, comparing CD8+ T cell responses generated against soluble protein Ags in the presence or absence of IFN-alphabeta. Injection of IFN-alpha was found to prolong the proliferation and expansion of Ag-specific CD8+ T cells, which was associated with marked up-regulation of IL-2 and IL-15 receptors on Ag-specific cells and expression of IL-15 in the draining lymph node. Surprisingly, neither IL-2 nor IL-15 was required for IFN-alpha-induced cross-priming. Conversely, expression of the IFN-alphabetaR by T cells was shown to be necessary for effective stimulation of the response by IFN-alpha. The finding that T cells represent direct targets of IFN-alphabeta-mediated stimulation reveals an additional mechanism by which the innate response to infection promotes adaptive immunity.
-------------------------------------

10007008_234 - 0.812190744605 - science
[aerosol, absorption, measurement, organic, scattering, carbon]

Aerosol scattering and absorption during the EUCAARI-LONGREX flights of the Facility for Airborne Atmospheric Measurements (FAAM) BAe-146: can measurements and models agree?
Scattering and absorption by aerosol in anthropogenically perturbed air masses over Europe has been measured using instrumentation flown on the UK's BAe-146-301 large Atmospheric Research Aircraft (ARA) operated by the Facility for Airborne Atmospheric Measurements (FAAM) on 14 flights during the EUCAARI-LONGREX campaign in May 2008. The geographical and temporal variations of the derived shortwave optical properties of aerosol are presented. Values of single scattering albedo of dry aerosol at 550 nm varied considerably from 0.86 to near unity, with a campaign average of 0.93 +/- 0.03. Dry aerosol optical depths ranged from 0.030 +/- 0.009 to 0.24 +/- 0.07. An optical properties closure study comparing calculations from composition data and Mie scattering code with the measured properties is presented. Agreement to within measurement uncertainties of 30\% can be achieved for both scattering and absorption, but the latter is shown to be sensitive to the refractive indices chosen for organic aerosols, and to a lesser extent black carbon, as well as being highly dependent on the accuracy of the absorption measurements. Agreement with the measured absorption can be achieved either if organic carbon is assumed to be weakly absorbing, or if the organic aerosol is purely scattering and the absorption measurement is an overestimate due to the presence of large amounts of organic carbon. Refractive indices could not be inferred conclusively due to this uncertainty, despite the enhancement in methodology compared to previous studies that derived from the use of the black carbon measurements. Hygroscopic growth curves derived from the wet nephelometer indicate moderate water uptake by the aerosol with a campaign mean f (RH) value (ratio in scattering) of 1.5 (range from 1.23 to 1.63) at 80\% relative humidity. This value is qualitatively consistent with the major chemical components of the aerosol measured by the aerosol mass spectrometer, which are primarily mixed organics and nitrate and some sulphate.
-------------------------------------

10006792_234 - 0.750128404398 - science
[pulsar, source, pwne, nebula, lat]

Fermi-LAT Search for Pulsar Wind Nebulae Around Gamma-ray Pulsars
The high sensitivity of the Fermi-LAT (Large Area Telescope) offers thefirst opportunity to study faint and extended GeV sources such as pulsarwind nebulae (PWNe). After one year of observation the LAT detected andidentified three PWNe: the Crab Nebula, Vela-X, and the PWN inside MSH15-52. In the meantime, the list of LAT detected pulsars increasedsteadily. These pulsars are characterized by high energy loss rates(Edot) from 3 {\times} 10$^{33}$ erg s$^{-1}$ to 5{\times} 10$^{38}$ erg s$^{-1}$ and are therefore likely topower a PWN. This paper summarizes the search for PWNe in the off-pulsewindows of 54 LAT-detected pulsars using 16 months of surveyobservations. Ten sources show significant emission, seven of theselikely being of magnetospheric origin. The detection of significantemission in the off-pulse interval offers new constraints on the{$\gamma$}-ray emitting regions in pulsar magnetospheres. The three othersources with significant emission are the Crab Nebula, Vela-X, and a newPWN candidate associated with the LAT pulsar PSR J1023-5746, coincidentwith the TeV source HESS J1023-575. We further explore the associationbetween the HESS and the Fermi source by modeling its spectral energydistribution. Flux upper limits derived for the 44 remaining sources areused to provide new constraints on famous PWNe that have been detectedat keV and/or TeV energies.
-------------------------------------

10005688_234 - 0.77280789898 - science
[disease, function, inflammatory, pulmonary, patient, bowel]

Pulmonary function in patients with inflammatory bowel disease.
Pulmonary function has been assessed in 36 outpatients with inflammatory bowel disease. The carbon monoxide transfer factor was found to be significantly reduced in patients as compared with matched controls (P less than 0.01). The reason for this reduction is not clear but it is unlikely to be due to sulfasalazine (Salazosulphapyridine).
-------------------------------------

10005630_234 - 0.716030165242 - science
[bran, bowel, syndrome, irritable, patient]

Bran and irritable bowel syndrome: time for reappraisal.
Whilst following up large numbers of patients with irritable bowel syndrome we got the impression that wholemeal wheat and bran products made people with the condition worse rather than better. One hundred consecutive new referrals, all of whom had tried bran, were questioned to resolve this issue. 55% of patients were made worse by bran whereas only 10% had found it helpful. With the exception of fruit, other forms of dietary fibre were not as detrimental and proprietary supplements were found to be beneficial. All symptoms of irritable bowel syndrome were exacerbated by bran, with bowel disturbance most often adversely affected, followed by abdominal distension and pain. The results of this study suggest that the use of bran in irritable bowel syndrome should be reconsidered. The study also raises the possibility that excessive consumption of bran in the community may actually be creating patients with irritable bowel syndrome by exacerbating mild, non-complaining cases.
-------------------------------------

10005613_234 - 0.892150789802 - science
[nicardipine, motility, effect, colonic]

Effect of intra-colonic nicardipine on colonic motility in irritable bowel syndrome.
Intravenous nicardipine has previously been shown to abolish the effect of a 1000-calorie meal on colonic motility. The purpose of this study was to use the same experimental design to assess the effect of nicardipine instilled directly into the colon. Each patient was studied three times when receiving either placebo, 15 mg or 30 mg nicardipine infused over 2 h. Blood concentrations of nicardipine remained very low, but neither dose of the drug affected either basal or post-prandial colonic motility. Topical nicardipine does not appear to have therapeutic potential and its activity is probably dependent on systemic absorption.
-------------------------------------

10007025_234 - 0.822861015813 - science
[preference, acid, amino, conductor, screw-sense, helical, insulator, domain]

Chemical communication: conductors and insulators of screw-sense preference between helical oligo(aminoisobutyric acid) domains.
(1)H NMR studies quantify the abilities of achiral amino acids to communicate a left-handed screw-sense preference from one helical Aib(4) domain to another: certain quaternary amino acids (e.g. Ac(6)c) act as effective conductors of conformational preference while others (e.g. diphenylglycine) acts as insulators.
-------------------------------------

10007019_234 - 0.753313831146 - science
[aerosol, island, layer, borneo, terrestrial, troposphere]

The lofting of Western Pacific regional aerosol by island thermodynamics as observed around Borneo
Vertical profiles of aerosol chemical composition, number concentration and size were measured throughout the lower troposphere of Borneo, a large tropical island in the western Pacific Ocean. Aerosol composition, size and number concentration measurements (using an Aerodyne Aerosol Mass Spectrometer, Passive Cavity Aerosol Spectrometer Probe and Condensation Particle Counter, respectively) were made both upwind and downwind of Borneo, as well as over the island itself, on board the UK BAe-146 research aircraft as part of the OP3 project. Two meteorological regimes were identified - one dominated by isolated terrestrial convection (ITC) which peaked in the afternoon, and the other characterised by more regionally active mesoscale convective systems (MCS). Upwind profiles show aerosol to be confined to a shallow marine boundary layer below 930 +/- 10 hPa (similar to 760 m above sea level, a.s.l.). As this air mass advects over the island with the mean free troposphere synoptic flow during the ITC-dominated regime, it is convectively lofted above the terrestrial surface mixed layer to heights of between 945 +/- 22 (similar to 630 m a.s.l.) and 740 +/- 44 hPa (similar to 2740 m a.s.l.), consistent with a coupling between the synoptic steering level flow and island sea breeze circulations. Terrestrial aerosol was observed to be lofted into this higher layer through both moist convective uplift and transport through turbulent diurnal sea-breeze cells. At the peak of convective activity in the mid-afternoons, organic aerosol loadings in the lofted layer were observed to be substantially higher than in the morning (by a mean factor of three). This organic matter is dominated by secondary aerosol from processing of biogenic gas phase precursors. Aerosol number concentration profiles suggest formation of new particles aloft in the atmosphere. By the time the air mass reaches the west coast of the island, terrestrial aerosol is enhanced in the lofted layer. Such uplift of aerosol in Borneo is expected to increase aerosol lifetimes in the lower free troposphere downwind, as they are above the boundary layer and therefore less likely to be lost by wet or dry deposition. It is also likely to change the role they play in the semi-direct and direct aerosol effects. The long chain of islands extending from Malaysia to Australia may all similarly be expected to present an orographic barrier to low level mean flow. This would lead to significant transport of aerosol into the tropical free troposphere across the Western Pacific region.
-------------------------------------

10007205_234 - 0.915864006297 - science
[chordate, decay, character, fossil, cambrian, bias, datum, difficulty, loss, interpretation, vertebrate]

Non-random decay of chordate characters causes bias in fossil interpretation
Exceptional preservation of soft-bodied Cambrian chordates provides our only direct information on the origin of vertebrates. Fossil chordates from this interval offer crucial insights into how the distinctive body plan of vertebrates evolved, but reading this pre-biomineralization fossil record is fraught with difficulties, leading to controversial and contradictory interpretations. The cause of these difficulties is taphonomic: we lack data on when and how important characters change as they decompose, resulting in a lack of constraint on anatomical interpretation and a failure to distinguish phylogenetic absence of characters from loss through decay. Here we show, from experimental decay of amphioxus and ammocoetes, that loss of chordate characters during decay is non-random: the more phylogenetically informative are the most labile, whereas plesiomorphic characters are decay resistant. The taphonomic loss of synapomorphies and relatively higher preservation potential of chordate plesiomorphies will thus result in bias towards wrongly placing fossils on the chordate stem. Application of these data to Cathaymyrus (Cambrian period of China) and Metaspriggina (Cambrian period of Canada) highlights the difficulties: these fossils cannot be placed reliably in the chordate or vertebrate stem because they could represent the decayed remains of any non-biomineralized, total-group chordate. Preliminary data suggest that this decay filter also affects other groups of organisms and that 'stem-ward slippage' may be a widespread but currently unrecognized bias in our understanding of the early evolution of a number of phyla.
-------------------------------------

10005612_234 - 0.845525220175 - medicine
[predominant, patient, diarrhoea, constipation, control, bowel, rectum, syndrome, rectal, irritable, sensation, normal, difference]

Anorectal manometry in irritable bowel syndrome: differences between diarrhoea and constipation predominant subjects.
Anorectal manometry with balloon distension was performed on 28 patients with diarrhoea predominant irritable bowel syndrome, 27 patients with constipation predominant irritable bowel syndrome and 30 normal controls. In the diarrhoea predominant group balloon volumes required to perceive the sensations of gas, stool, urgency of defecation and discomfort were significantly lower than in controls or constipation predominant patients (p less than 0.001). Diarrhoea predominant patients also had a significantly lower rectal compliance than controls or constipation predominant patients (p less than 0.03) but showed no difference in motor activity induced by distension. When the constipation predominant patients were compared with controls the only significant difference that emerged was in the volume at which discomfort was perceived. No significant differences between constipated subjects and controls were found in the distension induced motor activity. Symptom severity and psychological parameters were also recorded and the diarrhoea predominant patients were found to be more anxious than those with constipation (p = 0.04). It proved possible (by comparison with the control group) to identify three abnormal rectal subtypes in patients with irritable bowel syndrome. These were a sensitive rectum (low sensation thresholds, normal or low rectal pressure), a stiff rectum (normal or low sensation thresholds, high pressure) and an insensitive rectum (high sensation thresholds, normal or high pressure) and their distribution varied considerably depending on bowel habit. Some form of rectal abnormality was identified in 75% of diarrhoea predominant patients compared with 30% of constipation predominant subjects (p = 0.002). A sensitive rectum was a particular feature of diarrhoea predominant patients being observed in 57% of patients compared with only 7% of the constipated group (p less than 0.001).
-------------------------------------

10006807_234 - 0.736875720323 - science
[pulsar, tilde, eclipse, discovery, measurement, time, resolution, companion, high]

The High Time Resolution Universe Pulsar Survey - II. Discovery of five millisecond pulsars
We present the discovery of five millisecond pulsars found in themid-Galactic latitude portion of the High Time Resolution Universe(HTRU) survey. The pulsars have rotational periods from {\tilde}2.3 ms to{\tilde}7.5 ms, and all are in binary systems with orbital periodsranging from {\tilde}0.3 to {\tilde}150 d. In four of these systems, themost likely companion is a white dwarf, with minimum masses of{\tilde}0.2 M$_{???}$. The other pulsar, J1731-1847, has a verylow mass companion and exhibits eclipses and is thus a member of the'black widow' class of pulsar binaries. These eclipses have beenobserved in bands centred near frequencies of 700, 1400 and 3000 MHz,from which measurements have been made of the electron density in theeclipse region. These measurements have been used to examine somepossible eclipse mechanisms. The eclipse and other properties of thissource are used to perform a comparison with the other known eclipsingand 'black widow' pulsars.These new discoveries occupy a short-period and high-dispersion measure(DM) region of parameter space, which we demonstrate is a directconsequence of the high time and frequency resolution of the HTRUsurvey. The large implied distances to our new discoveries makeobservation of their companions unlikely with both current opticaltelescopes and the Fermi Gamma-ray Space Telescope. The extremelycircular orbits make any advance of periastron measurements highlyunlikely. No relativistic Shapiro delays are obvious in any of thesystems although the low flux densities would make their detectiondifficult unless the orbits were fortuitously edge-on.
-------------------------------------

10006904_234 - 0.880131422453 - science
[cd8, cell, mouse, nkg2d, tuberculosis, il-15, il-15-deficient]

Interleukin-15 mediates protection against experimental tuberculosis: a role for NKG2D-dependent effector mechanisms of CD8+ T cells.
CD8+ T cells are involved in protection against Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection and represent a promising target for new vaccine strategies. Because IL-15 is important for the homeostasis of CD8+ T cells, we studied the immune response in IL-15-deficient mice during tuberculosis. In the absence of IL-15, CD8+ T cells failed to efficiently accumulate in draining lymph nodes and at the site of infection. The expression of antigen-specific effector functions, such as the production of interferon-gamma and cytotoxicity, were impaired in CD8+ T cells, but not CD4+ T cells, from IL-15-deficient mice. This defect was associated with an increased mortality of IL-15-deficient mice during the chronic phase of infection. The lectin-like stimulatory receptor natural killer group 2D (NKG2D) was up-regulated on CD8+ T cells only from wild-type mice, but not from IL-15-deficient mice. Mechanistically, blocking NKG2D function with an mAb inhibited M. tuberculosis-directed CD8+ T cell responses in vitro. We conclude that in addition to regulating the expansion of CD8+ T cells, IL-15 is also necessary for inducing effector mechanisms in CD8+ T cells that depend on NKG2D expression. Hence, our results implicate IL-15 and NKG2D as promising targets for modulating CD8+ T cell-mediated protection against tuberculosis.
-------------------------------------

10007000_234 - 0.93143197019 - science
[digestion, blg, reactivity, allergenic, pc]

Effect of simulated gastro-duodenal digestion on the allergenic reactivity of beta-lactoglobulin.
UNLABELLED: ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Cow's milk (CM) allergy affects about 2% of infants. The allergenicity of dietary proteins, including those from CM, has been related to their digestibility although the generality of the link and its causality remains to be demonstrated. In this study we use an in vitro digestion system, to investigate the digestibility of β-lactoglobulin (blg) during gastrointestinal transit and to assess the impact of this process on blg allergenic reactivity in CM allergic children. METHODS: Blg digesta were prepared using an in vitro digestion protocol simulating either gastric digestion alone or followed by duodenal digestion with or without phosphatidylcholine (PC). Biochemical analysis of blg digesta was performed by SDS-PAGE and their concentration was measured by a sandwich ELISA. Assessment of their allergenic reactivity was done in vitro by EAST inhibition, specific basophil activation (basotest) and lymphocyte proliferation (PCNA-flow cytometry) assays using sera and cells from patients allergic to blg and in vivo by skin prick testing (SPT) of these patients. RESULTS: Blg was only broken down to smaller peptides after gastro-duodenal digestion although a sizeable amount of intact protein still remained. Digestion did not modify the IgE binding capacity of blg except for gastro-duodenal digestion performed in the absence of PC. These results are consistent with the quantity of intact blg remaining in the digesta. Overall both gastric and gastroduodenal digestion enhanced activation of sensitized basophils and proliferation of sensitized lymphocytes by blg. However, there was a tendency towards reduction in mean diameter of SPT following digestion, the PC alone during phase 1 digestion causing a significant increase in mean diameter. CONCLUSIONS: Digestion did not reduce the allergenic reactivity of blg to a clinically insignificant extent, PC inhibiting digestion and thereby protecting blg allergenic reactivity. SPT reactivity was reduced compared to blg immunoreactivity in in vitro tests.
-------------------------------------

10005671_234 - 0.887801027656 - medicine
[fibromyalgia, patient, sicca, complex, ib, ibs]

Increased prevalence of sicca complex and fibromyalgia in patients with irritable bowel syndrome.
OBJECTIVE: As many as 70% of patients with fibromyalgia complain of the symptoms of irritable bowel syndrome (IBS), but there is a clinical impression that IBS patients do not suffer from fibromyalgia as frequently. The sicca complex (dry eyes and mouth) is also commonly observed in fibromyalgia, but its prevalence in IBS has not been evaluated. Our objective was to assess the frequency of fibromyalgia and sicca complex in secondary care patients with IBS. METHODS: Forty-six secondary care patients with IBS and 46 healthy controls were assessed by a rheumatologist for the presence of fibromyalgia and objective evidence of sicca complex (Schirmer and Rose-Bengal tests). Psychological status was also assessed (HAD questionnaire). RESULTS: Thirteen (28%) IBS patients suffered from fibromyalgia, compared with five (11%) controls, a difference of 17% (95% confidence intervals CI, 2-33%). Fifteen (33%) IBS patients versus three (6%) controls had sicca complex, a difference of 27% (95% CI, 11-45%). CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that the prevalence of fibromyalgia in IBS is approximately half that of IBS in fibromyalgia. Furthermore, sicca complex seems to be another complaint that should be added to the list of extracolonic manifestations of IBS. Study of the overlap between functional disorders presenting to different specialties may give new insights into the pathophysiology of these puzzling conditions.
-------------------------------------

10006955_234 - 0.868187480676 - science
[ischemia, human, model, ischemic, ventricular, wave, cell]

Modeling of electrophysiology and simulation of ECG under ischemic condition in human ventricular tissue.
In this paper, to analyze the functional influence of ischemia on cardiac cell electrical activity and subsequently on ventricular electrical wave conduction, a human ventricular ischemic model was developed, which took into account three major pathophysiological components of ischemias hyperkalaemia, acidosis, and anoxia. This model simulated the action potential (AP) propagations of endocardial, midmycardial and epicardial cells with different levels of ischemia, and the influence of each factor on cell AP was analyzed. Finally the ECG waveform under ischemia was quantified by using a 2D model of human left ventricular tissue based on the anatomical structure of human heart. The experimental results showed that under ischemia action potential durations (APD) were reduced. In most cases, the larger the size of ischemic region or the more severe the ischemic level, the more dramatic the changes in the amplitude of ST-T wave were observed. For the three components of ischemia, hyperkalaemia was the dominant contributor to ST-T wave changes, which was in agreement with the results obtained on animal models.
-------------------------------------

10006823_234 - 0.755761103662 - science
[pulsar, emission, msp, psr, high, polarization, profile, survey]

The High Time Resolution Universe Pulsar Survey - IV. Discovery and polarimetry of millisecond pulsars
We present the discovery of six millisecond pulsars (MSPs) in the High Time Resolution Universe (HTRU) survey for pulsars and fast transients carried out with the Parkes radio telescope. All six are in binary systems with approximately circular orbits and are likely to have white dwarf companions. PSR J1017-7156 has a high flux density and a narrow pulse width, making it ideal for precision timing experiments. PSR J1446-4701 and PSR J1125-5825 are coincident with gamma-ray sources, and folding the high-energy photons with the radio timing ephemeris shows evidence of pulsed gamma-ray emission. PSR J1502-6752 has a spin period of 26.7 ms, and its low period derivative implies that it is a recycled pulsar. The orbital parameters indicate it has a very low mass function, and therefore a companion mass much lower than usually expected for such a mildly recycled pulsar. In addition we present polarization profiles for all 12 MSPs discovered in the HTRU survey to date. Similar to previous observations of MSPs, we find that many have large widths and a wide range of linear and circular polarization fractions. Their polarization profiles can be highly complex, and although the observed position angles often do not obey the rotating vector model, we present several examples of those that do. We speculate that the emission heights of MSPs are a substantial fraction of the light cylinder radius in order to explain broad emission profiles, which then naturally leads to a large number of cases where emission from both poles is observed.
-------------------------------------

10006815_234 - 0.82825258202 - science
[pulsar, telescope, millisecond, fermi, nancay]

Discovery of the millisecond pulsar PSR J2043+1711 in a Fermi source with the Nançay Radio Telescope
We report the discovery of the millisecond pulsar PSR J2043+1711 in a search of a Fermi Large Area Telescope (LAT) source with no known associations, with the Nançay Radio Telescope. The new pulsar, confirmed with the Green Bank Telescope, has a spin period of 2.38 ms, is relatively nearby (? kpc) and is in a 1.48-d orbit around a low-mass companion, probably an He-type white dwarf. Using an ephemeris based on Arecibo, Nançay and Westerbork timing measurements, pulsed gamma-ray emission was detected in the data recorded by the Fermi LAT. The gamma-ray light curve and spectral properties are typical of other gamma-ray millisecond pulsars seen with Fermi. X-ray observations of the pulsar with Suzaku and the Swift X-ray Telescope yielded no detection. At 1.4 GHz, we observe strong flux density variations because of interstellar diffractive scintillation; however, a sharp peak can be observed at this frequency during bright scintillation states. At 327 MHz, the pulsar is detected with a much higher signal-to-noise ratio and its flux density is far more steady. However, at that frequency the Arecibo instrumentation cannot yet fully resolve the pulse profile. Despite that, our pulse time-of-arrival measurements have a post-fit residual rms of 2 ?s. This and the expected stability of this system have made PSR J2043+1711 one of the first new Fermi-selected millisecond pulsars to be added to pulsar gravitational wave timing arrays. It has also allowed a significant measurement of relativistic delays in the times of arrival of the pulses due to the curvature of space-time near the companion, but not yet with enough precision to derive useful masses for the pulsar and the companion. Nevertheless, a mass for the pulsar between 1.7 and 2.0 Msun can be derived if a standard millisecond pulsar formation model is assumed. In this paper, we also present a comprehensive summary of pulsar searches in Fermi LAT sources with the Nançay Radio Telescope to date.
-------------------------------------

10005620_234 - 0.800827616739 - science
[autonomic, bowel, neuropathy, abdominal, patient, control, pain, distension]

Functional bowel symptoms in diabetes--the role of autonomic neuropathy.
The autonomic nervous system may have a role in the pathogenesis of irritable bowel syndrome. If so, the occurrence of irritable bowel symptomatology in patients with autonomic neuropathy might indicate which, if any, of these symptoms are dependent on autonomic innervation. The prevalence of abdominal pain, abdominal distension and an abnormal bowel habit was recorded in 200 patients with diabetes, screened for autonomic neuropathy, and 200 matched controls. Constipation was significantly more common in patients with autonomic neuropathy than in those without, or controls (22.0% vs 9.2% vs 6.8%). The prevalence of abdominal pain and abdominal distension was no different in patients with and without autonomic neuropathy and their respective controls. The results of this study suggest that control of bowel habit is more dependent on the total integrity of the autonomic nervous system than the perception of pain or the production of distension.
-------------------------------------

10006912_234 - 0.962959542455 - science
[pf-4, monocyte, macrophage, burst, cell]

Platelet factor 4/CXCL4 induces phagocytosis and the generation of reactive oxygen metabolites in mononuclear phagocytes independently of Gi protein activation or intracellular calcium transients.
Platelet factor 4 (PF-4), a platelet-derived CXC chemokine, is known to prevent human monocytes from apoptosis and to promote differentiation of these cells into HLA-DR(-) macrophages. In this study, we investigated the role of PF-4 in the control of acute monocyte proinflammatory responses involved in the direct combat of microbial invaders. We show that PF-4 increases monocyte phagocytosis and provokes a strong formation of oxygen radicals but lacks a chemotactic activity in these cells. Compared with FMLP, PF-4-induced oxidative burst was later in its onset but was remarkably longer in its duration (lasting for up to 60 min). Furthermore, in PF-4-prestimulated cells, FMLP- as well as RANTES-induced burst responses became synergistically enhanced. As we could show, PF-4-mediated oxidative burst in monocytes does not involve Gi proteins, elevation of intracellular free calcium concentrations, or binding to CXCR3B, a novel PF-4 receptor recently discovered on endothelial cells. Moreover, we found that PF-4 acts on macrophages in a dual manner. On the one hand, very similar to GM-CSF or M-CSF, PF-4 treatment of monocytes generates macrophages with a high capacity for unspecific phagocytosis. On the other hand, short term priming of GM-CSF-induced human macrophages with PF-4 substantially increases their capability for particle ingestion and oxidative burst. A comparable effect was also observed in murine bone marrow-derived macrophages, indicating cross-reactivity of human PF-4 between both species. Taken together, PF-4 may play a crucial role in the induction and maintenance of an unspecific immune response.
-------------------------------------

10006959_234 - 0.837169500556 - science
[node, sinus, human, pacemaker, distribution, heart, right, area, anatomical, atrium, computer]

Computer three-dimensional anatomical reconstruction of the human sinus node and a novel paranodal area.
We have previously shown in rabbit that the pacemaker of the heart (the sinus node) is widespread and matches the wide distribution of the leading pacemaker site within the right atrium. There is, however, uncertainty about the precise location of the pacemaker in human heart, and its spatial relationships with the surrounding right atrial muscle. Therefore, the aim of the current study was to investigate the distribution of the sinus node tissue in a series of healthy human hearts and, for one of the hearts to construct a computer three-dimensional anatomical model of the sinus node, including the likely orientation of myocytes. A combination of experimental techniques--diffusion tensor magnetic resonance imaging (DT-MRI), histology, immunohistochemistry, image processing and computer modelling--was used. Our data show that the sinus node was larger than in previous studies and, most importantly, we identified a previously unknown area running alongside the sinus node (the "paranodal area"), which is even more extensive than the sinus node. This area possesses properties of both nodal and atrial tissues and may have a role in pacemaking. For example, it could explain the wide spread distribution of the leading pacemaker site in human right atrium, a phenomenon known as the wandering pacemaker observed in clinics. In summary, a novel 3D anatomical reconstruction presents a new picture of the distribution of nodal cells within the human right atrium.
-------------------------------------

10006975_234 - 0.936251390531 - science
[receptor, cholesterol, plasma, ligand, g-protein-coupled, nuclear, acid, eadsa, oxysterol]

Analytical strategies for characterization of oxysterol lipidomes: Liver X receptor ligands in plasma.
Bile acids, bile alcohols, and hormonal steroids represent the ultimate biologically active products of cholesterol metabolism in vertebrates. However, intermediates in their formation, including oxysterols and cholestenoic acids, also possess known, e.g., as ligands to nuclear and G-protein-coupled receptors, and unknown regulatory activities. The potential diversity of molecules originating from the cholesterol structure is very broad and their abundance in biological materials ranges over several orders of magnitude. Here we describe the application of enzyme-assisted derivatization for sterol analysis (EADSA) in combination with liquid chromatography-electrospray ionization-mass spectrometry to define the oxysterol and cholestenoic acid metabolomes of human plasma. Quantitative profiling of adult plasma using EADSA leads to the detection of over 30 metabolites derived from cholesterol, some of which are ligands to the nuclear receptors LXR, FXR, and pregnane X receptor or the G-protein-coupled receptor Epstein-Barr virus-induced gene 2. The potential of the EADSA technique in screening for inborn errors of cholesterol metabolism and biosynthesis is demonstrated by the unique plasma profile of patients suffering from cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis. The analytical methods described are easily adapted to the analysis of other biological fluids, including cerebrospinal fluid, and also tissues, e.g., brain, in which nuclear and G-protein-coupled receptors may have important regulatory roles.
-------------------------------------

10005619_234 - 0.73987723284 - medicine
[vaccine, nurse, immunization, staff, hepatitis, cent, uptake, doctor]

Poor uptake of hepatitis B immunization amongst hospital-based health care staff.
The uptake of hepatitis B vaccine was assessed amongst 100 medical and 100 nursing staff in a teaching hospital with a policy of recommending to those at risk that they should seek immunization from their general practitioners. Sixteen per cent of nurses and 31% of doctors had completed a course of immunization with confirmation of seroconversion. An additional 9% and 18% respectively had been immunized without post-immunization serology. Ninety three per cent of nurses and 61% of doctors who had not been immunized would like to receive the vaccine. The commonest reasons for non-immunization amongst nurses were fear of vaccine and lack of advice, and amongst doctors, apathy and difficulty in obtaining the vaccine. Eighty seven per cent of medical staff and 57% of nurses had a history of needle stick injury. The low rates of vaccine uptake in this study combined with the high incidence of needle stick injury calls for a reappraisal of present hepatitis B vaccination programmes in hospitals. In particular the abrogation of responsibility for immunization to general practitioners is probably a major disincentive to potential vaccines.
-------------------------------------

10007268_234 - 0.906930276296 - science
[cell, receptor, chain, functional, cd34, hybrid, hematopoietic]

Detection of a functional hybrid receptor gammac/GM-CSFRbeta in human hematopoietic CD34+ cells.
A functional hybrid receptor associating the common gamma chain (gammac) with the granulocyte/macrophage colony-stimulating factor receptor beta (GM-CSFRbeta) chain is found in mobilized human peripheral blood (MPB) CD34+ hematopoietic progenitors, SCF/Flt3-L primed cord blood (CB) precursors (CBPr CD34+/CD56-), and CD34+ myeloid cell lines, but not in normal natural killer (NK) cells, the cytolytic NK-L cell line or nonhematopoietic cells. We demonstrated, using CD34+ TF1beta cells, which express an interleukin (IL)-15Ralpha/beta/gammac receptor, that within the hybrid receptor, the GM-CSFRbeta chain inhibits the IL-15-triggered gammac/JAK3-specific signaling controlling TF1beta cell proliferation. However, the gammac chain is part of a functional GM-CSFR, activating GM-CSF-dependent STAT5 nuclear translocation and the proliferation of TF1beta cells. The hybrid receptor is functional in normal hematopoietic progenitors in which both subunits control STAT5 activation. Finally, the parental TF1 cell line, which lacks the IL-15Rbeta chain, nevertheless expresses both a functional hybrid receptor that controls JAK3 phosphorylation and a novel IL-15alpha/gammac/TRAF2 complex that triggers nuclear factor kappaB activation. The lineage-dependent distribution and function of these receptors suggest that they are involved in hematopoiesis because they modify transduction pathways that play a major role in the differentiation of hematopoietic progenitors.
-------------------------------------

10006963_234 - 0.701330701127 - science
[cell, element, alternan, model, t-tubule, atrial, release, myocyte, mammal, wave, central, propagation, genesis, study, cytoplasmic, cardiac]

Mechanisms by which cytoplasmic calcium wave propagation and alternans are generated in cardiac atrial myocytes lacking T-tubules-insights from a simulation study.
This study investigated the mechanisms underlying the propagation of cytoplasmic calcium waves and the genesis of systolic Ca(2+) alternans in cardiac myocytes lacking transverse tubules (t-tubules). These correspond to atrial cells of either small mammals or large mammals that have lost their t-tubules due to disease-induced structural remodeling (e.g., atrial fibrillation). A mathematical model was developed for a cluster of ryanodine receptors distributed on the cross section of a cell that was divided into 13 elements with a spatial resolution of 2 μm. Due to the absence of t-tubules, L-type Ca(2+) channels were only located in the peripheral elements close to the cell-membrane surface and produced Ca(2+) signals that propagated toward central elements by triggering successive Ca(2+)-induced Ca(2+) release (CICR) via Ca(2+) diffusion between adjacent elements. Under control conditions, the Ca(2+) signals did not fully propagate to the central region of the cell. However, with modulation of several factors responsible for Ca(2+) handling, such as the L-type Ca(2+) channels (Ca(2+) influx), SERCA pumps (sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR) Ca(2+) uptake), and ryanodine receptors (SR Ca(2+) release), Ca(2+) wave propagation to the center of the cell could occur. These simulation results are consistent with previous experimental data from atrial cells of small mammals. The model further reveals that spatially functional heterogeneity in Ca(2+) diffusion within the cell produced a steep relationship between the SR Ca(2+) content and the cytoplasmic Ca(2+) concentration. This played an important role in the genesis of Ca(2+) alternans that were more obvious in central than in peripheral elements. Possible association between the occurrence of Ca(2+) alternans and the model parameters of Ca(2+) handling was comprehensively explored in a wide range of one- and two-parameter spaces. In addition, the model revealed a spontaneous second Ca(2+) release in response to a single voltage stimulus pulse with SR Ca(2+) overloading and augmented Ca(2+) influx. This study provides what to our knowledge are new insights into the genesis of Ca(2+) alternans and spontaneous second Ca(2+) release in cardiac myocytes that lack t-tubules.
-------------------------------------

10005590_234 - 0.7096455734 - science
[oesophageal, function, ventricular, group, patient, normal, abnormality]

Left ventricular function and oesophageal function in patients with angina pectoris and normal coronary angiograms.
Left ventricular function and oesophageal function (including oesophageal manometry and pH monitoring) were investigated and a psychiatric assessment carried out in 63 patients with angina pectoris and normal coronary angiograms. Twenty two (35%) patients had regional abnormalities of left ventricular wall motion (group A). Thirty six (57%) patients had an oesophageal abnormality (group B); 19 patients had gastro-oesophageal reflux and abnormal oesophageal motility, five had gastro-oesophageal reflux alone, and 12 had abnormal oesophageal motility alone. Only four had regional abnormalities of the left ventricular wall and abnormal oesophageal function. In nine (14%) patients left ventricular and oesophageal function were normal (group C). Psychiatric morbidity was significantly less common in group A than in groups B and C and was similar in group B and group C. A definite abnormality of left ventricular function, oesophageal function, or psychiatric morbidity is present in a high proportion of patients with angina pectoris and normal coronary angiograms and in some instances this may lead to specific treatment. If quantitative assessment of left ventricular function is normal, oesophageal investigations should be performed. Endoscopy of the upper gastrointestinal tract may demonstrate oesophageal disease, but, if findings are normal, oesophageal manometry and ambulatory oesophageal pH monitoring (including during treadmill exercise testing) should be carried out.
-------------------------------------

10006533_234 - 0.716233018526 - science
[page, intensity, cosmology, mapping, september, proceedings, bingo, approach, moriond, single, dish, figure]

BINGO: a single dish approach to 21cm intensity mapping
September 1, 2012 4 pages, 2 figures, to appear in the Proceedings of Moriond Cosmology 2012
-------------------------------------

10007187_234 - 0.789398856463 - technology_and_computing
[communication, architecture, processor, neural, spinnaker, scalable]

Scalable communications for a million-core neural processing architecture
The design of a new high-performance computing platform to model biological neural networks requires scalable, layered communications in both hardware and software. SpiNNaker’s hardware is based upon Multi-Processor System-on-Chips (MPSoCs) with flexible, power-efficient, custom communication between processors and chips. The architecture scales from a single 18-processor chip to over 1 million processors and to simulations of billion-neuron, trillion-synapse models, with tens of trillions of neural spike-event packets conveyed each second. The communication networks and overlying protocols are key to the successful operation of the SpiNNaker architecture, designed together to maximise performance and minimise the power demands of the platform. SpiNNaker is a work in progress, having recently reached a major milestone with the delivery of the first MPSoCs. This paper presents the architectural justification, which is now supported by preliminary measured results of silicon performance, indicating that it is indeed scalable to a million-plus processor system.
-------------------------------------

10006889_234 - 0.817441734429 - science
[cell, il-15]

IL-15/IL-15 receptor biology: a guided tour through an expanding universe.
The cytokine interleukin-15 (IL-15) has a key role in promoting survival, proliferation and activation of natural killer (NK) and CD8+ T cells. Despite its functional similarities to IL-2, IL-15 affects a wider range of target cell populations and utilizes different mechanisms of signaling. Here, we review recent advances in the IL-15-mediated signaling, and in the functional properties on cells besides T lymphocytes and NK cells. These are discussed in the context of their potential clinical and therapeutic relevance.
-------------------------------------

10007015_234 - 0.784866775696 - science
[particle, size, primary, model, bl, aerosol, uncertainty]

Primary versus secondary contributions to particle number concentrations in the European boundary layer
It is important to understand the relative contribution of primary and secondary particles to regional and global aerosol so that models can attribute aerosol radiative forcing to different sources. In large-scale models, there is considerable uncertainty associated with treatments of particle formation (nucleation) in the boundary layer (BL) and in the size distribution of emitted primary particles, leading to uncertainties in predicted cloud condensation nuclei (CCN) concentrations. Here we quantify how primary particle emissions and secondary particle formation influence size-resolved particle number concentrations in the BL using a global aerosol microphysics model and aircraft and ground site observations made during the May 2008 campaign of the European Integrated Project on Aerosol Cloud Climate Air Quality Interactions (EUCAARI). We tested four different parameterisations for BL nucleation and two assumptions for the emission size distribution of anthropogenic and wildfire carbonaceous particles. When we emit carbonaceous particles at small sizes (as recommended by the Aerosol Inter-comparison project, AEROCOM), the spatial distributions of campaign-mean number concentrations of particles with diameter >50 nm (N-50) and >100 nm (N-100) were well captured by the model (R-2 >= 0.8) and the normalised mean bias (NMB) was also small (-18\% for N-50 and -1\% for N-100). Emission of carbonaceous particles at larger sizes, which we consider to be more realistic for low spatial resolution global models, results in equally good correlation but larger bias (R-2 >= 0.8, NMB = -52\% and -29\%), which could be partly but not entirely compensated by BL nucleation. Within the uncertainty of the observations and accounting for the uncertainty in the size of emitted primary particles, BL nucleation makes a statistically significant contribution to CCN-sized particles at less than a quarter of the ground sites. Our results show that a major source of uncertainty in CCN-sized particles in polluted European air is the emitted size of primary carbonaceous particles. New information is required not just from direct observations, but also to determine the ``effective emission size{''} and composition of primary particles appropriate for different resolution models.
-------------------------------------

10006908_234 - 0.849173851502 - science
[therapy, antitumor, ikdc, il-2, combination, cell, im, effect, il-15]

The critical role of IL-15 in the antitumor effects mediated by the combination therapy imatinib and IL-2.
The synergistic antitumor effects of the combination therapy imatinib mesylate (IM) and IL-2 depended upon NK1.1- expressing cells and were associated with the accumulation of CD11c(int)B220(+)NK1.1(+) IFN-producing killer dendritic cells (IKDC) into tumor beds. In this study, we show that the antitumor efficacy of the combination therapy was compromised in IL-15 and IFN-type 1R loss-of-function mice. IL-15Ralpha was required for the proliferation of IKDC during IM plus IL-2 therapy. Trans-presentation of IL-15/IL-15Ralpha activated IKDC to express CCR2 and to respond to type 1 IFN by producing CCL2. Moreover, the antitumor effects of the combination therapy correlated with a CCL2-dependent recruitment of IKDC, but not B220(-) NK cells, into tumor beds. Altogether, the IL-15-driven peripheral expansion and the CCL-2-dependent intratumoral chemoattraction of IKDC are two critical parameters dictating the antitumor efficacy of IM plus IL-2 in mice.
-------------------------------------

10006994_234 - 0.830437084885 - science
[mixture, flavonoid, analysis, nmr, similarity, method, dosy]

Flavonoid Mixture Analysis by Matrix-Assisted Diffusion-Ordered Spectroscopy
The structural similarity of flavonoids, often present in natural product mixtures, makes their analysis by NMR methods less than straightforward. This similarity is a dual problem for one of the most powerful NMR methods for mixture analysis, diffusion-ordered spectroscopy (DOSY), which relies both on well-resolved peaks and on differences in hydrodynamic radii for separating the signals from different components in a mixture. To overcome these limitations, we use a matrix-assisted DOSY approach that exploits differential chemical interactions with a slow diffusion matrix (here micellar sodium dodecyl sulfate) to resolve flavonoid mixtures in mixed solvents.The structural similarity of flavonoids, often present in natural product mixtures, makes their analysis by NMR methods less than straightforward. This similarity is a dual problem for one of the most powerful NMR methods for mixture analysis, diffusion-ordered spectroscopy (DOSY), which relies both on well-resolved peaks and on differences in hydrodynamic radii for separating the signals from different components in a mixture. To overcome these limitations, we use a matrix-assisted DOSY approach that exploits differential chemical interactions with a slow diffusion matrix (here micellar sodium dodecyl sulfate) to resolve flavonoid mixtures in mixed solvents.
-------------------------------------

10005791_234 - 0.876989437098 - technology_and_computing
[system, nonlinear, constraint, portfolio, belief, optimisation]

Belief rule-based system for portfolio optimisation with nonlinear cash-flows and constraints
A belief rule-based (BRB) system is a generic nonlinear modelling and inference scheme. It is based on the concept of belief structures and evidential reasoning (ER), and has been shown to be capable of capturing complicated nonlinear causal relationships between antecedent attributes and consequents. The aim of this paper is to develop a BRB system that complements the RiskMetrics WealthBench system for portfolio optimisation with nonlinear cash-flows and constraints. Two optimisation methods are presented to locate efficient portfolios under different constraints specified by the investors. Numerical studies demonstrate the effectiveness and efficiency of the proposed methodology.
-------------------------------------

10005691_234 - 0.935396333849 - science
[microscopy, rectal, disease, electron, group, crohn, mucosa]

Scanning electron microscopy of rectal mucosa in Crohn's disease.
Rectal biopsies from healthy control subjects, and from patients with Crohn's disease whose rectal mucosa appeared normal by sigmoidoscopy and light microscopy, were examined by scanning electron microscopy. Appearances within both groups were quite variable, and no clear differences between the groups could be distinguished.
-------------------------------------

10006789_234 - 0.71769124793 - science
[gamma, ray, emission, day, pulsar, period, source]

Discovery of High-energy Gamma-ray Emission from the Binary System PSR B1259-63/LS 2883 around Periastron with Fermi
We report on the discovery of {\gt}=100 MeV {$\gamma$}-rays from the binarysystem PSR B1259-63/LS 2883 using the Large Area Telescope (LAT) onboard Fermi. The system comprises a radio pulsar in orbit around a Bestar. We report on LAT observations from near apastron to \ {}128 daysafter the time of periastron, t$_{p}$ , on 2010 December 15. No{$\gamma$}-ray emission was detected from this source when it was far fromperiastron. Faint {$\gamma$}-ray emission appeared as the pulsar approachedperiastron. At \ {}t$_{p}$ + 30 days, the {\gt}=100 MeV {$\gamma$}-rayflux increased over a period of a few days to a peak flux 20-30 timesthat seen during the pre-periastron period, but with a softer spectrum.For the following month, it was seen to be variable on daily timescales,but remained at \ {}(1-4) {\times} 10$^{-6}$ cm$^{-2}$s$^{-1}$ before starting to fade at \ {}t$_{p}$ + 57 days. Thetotal {$\gamma$}-ray luminosity observed during this period is comparableto the spin-down power of the pulsar. Simultaneous radio and X-rayobservations of the source showed no corresponding dramatic changes inradio and X-ray flux between the pre-periastron and post-periastronflares. We discuss possible explanations for the observed{$\gamma$}-ray-only flaring of the source.
-------------------------------------

10007024_234 - 0.92349010539 - science
[urea, chemistry, substrate]

The urea renaissance.
Over the last decade the use of urea derivatives as useful reagents, catalysts, and structural features in organic chemistry has increased rapidly. They now find utility as hydrogen-bond donors in organocatalysts and anion transporters, as important scaffolds in supramolecular chemistry, as lithiation directors, amination substrates, and promoters of metalation, and as substrates for novel rearrangement reactions. Highlighted herein is the remarkably rapid and recent development of the chemistry of ureas, which for many years had been considered unreactive, intractable, and of little value.
-------------------------------------

10007007_234 - 0.927280756699 - science
[aerosol, concentration, particle, observation, growth]

Aerosol observations and growth rates downwind of the anvil of a deep tropical thunderstorm
We present a case study of Aitken and accumulation mode aerosol observed downwind of the anvil of a deep tropical thunderstorm. The measurements were made by condensation nuclei counters flown on the Egrett high-altitude aircraft from Darwin during the ACTIVE campaign, in monsoon conditions producing widespread convection over land and ocean. Maximum measured concentrations of aerosol with diameter greater than 10 nm were 25 000 cm(-3) (STP). By calculating back-trajectories from the observations, and projecting onto infrared satellite images, the time since the air exited cloud was estimated. In this way a time scale of about 3 hours was derived for the Aitken aerosol concentration to reach its peak. We examine the hypothesis that the growth in aerosol concentrations can be explained by production of sulphuric acid from SO2 followed by particle nucleation and coagulation. Estimates of the sulphuric acid production rate show that the observations are only consistent with this hypothesis if the particles coagulate to sizes > 10 nm much more quickly than is suggested by current theory. Alternatively, other condensible gases (possibly organic) drive the growth of aerosol particles in the TTL.
-------------------------------------

10006891_234 - 0.817441734429 - science
[cd127, cell, cd8, cd44, high, il-7, il-15]

IL-15 inhibits IL-7Rα expression by memory-phenotype CD8⁺ T cells in the bone marrow.
CD127 is the IL-7 receptor α-chain and its expression is tightly regulated during T-cell differentiation. We previously showed that the bone marrow (BM) is a key organ for proliferation and maintenance of both antigen-specific and CD44(high) memory CD8(+) T cells. Interestingly, BM memory CD8(+) T cells express lower levels of membrane CD127 than do the corresponding spleen and lymph node cells. We investigated the requirements for CD127 downmodulation by CD44(high) memory-phenotype CD8(+) T cells in the BM of C57BL/6 mice. By comparing genetically modified (i.e. CD127tg, IL-7 KO, IL-15 KO, IL-15Rα KO) with wild-type (WT) mice, we found that the key molecule regulating CD127 downmodulation was IL-15 but not IL-7, and that the intact CD127 gene was required, including the promoter. Indeed, CD127 mRNA transcript levels were lower in CD44(high) CD8(+) T cells from the BM than in those from the spleen of WT mice, indicating organ-specific regulation. Although levels of the CD127 transactivator Foxo1 were low in BM CD44(high) CD8(+) T cells, Foxo1 was not involved in IL-15-induced CD127 downmodulation. Thus, recirculating CD44(high) CD8(+) T cells passing through the BM transiently downregulate CD127 in response to IL-15, with implications for human therapies acting on the IL-7/CD127 axis, for example cytokine treatments in cancer patients.
-------------------------------------

10005589_234 - 0.856377003079 - science
[nicardipine, bowel, syndrome, motility, irritable, colonic]

Reduction of colonic motility by intravenous nicardipine in irritable bowel syndrome.
The effect of nicardipine, a new dihydropyridine calcium antagonist, on postprandial colonic motility was assessed in 10 patients with irritable bowel syndrome. Each patient was studied twice receiving intravenously either N saline or nicardipine after a 1000 calorie meal. In the control study there was a significant (p less than 0.01) postprandial increase in the contractile activity of the colon, reaching a peak at approximately 20 minutes. Intravenous nicardipine completely abolished the colonic response, with a significant reduction in the number (p less than 0.005) and amplitude (p less than 0.005) of contractions and of the motility index (p less than 0.025). These results support the need for further studies to evaluate the therapeutic role of nicardipine in the irritable bowel syndrome.
-------------------------------------

10005687_234 - 0.852743331244 - medicine
[disease, patient]

Diagnosis of Crohn's disease.
A study has been made of diagnostic errors and delays in 140 patients with Crohn's disease. Results were correlated with the site of the disease. Only 13% of patients with small-bowel disease and 21% of the group as a whole were correctly diagnosed after initial investigation. A large number of misdiagnoses were made, and these were often multiple. Of patients with small-bowel disease, 19% were first thought to be suffering from a psychiatric disorder.
-------------------------------------

10005674_234 - 0.922272952993 - medicine
[sb-207266-a, bowel, patient, irritable, syndrome, rectal, receptor, sensitivity, 5-ht4, transit, day, placebo]

5-HT4 receptor antagonism in irritable bowel syndrome: effect of SB-207266-A on rectal sensitivity and small bowel transit.
BACKGROUND: Pre-clinical studies indicate that the 5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT)4 receptor may be involved in the pathophysiology of irritable bowel syndrome and that antagonism of this receptor may be an effective therapeutic strategy. AIM: To investigate the effects of SB-207266-A, a selective 5-HT4 receptor antagonist on rectal sensitivity and small bowel transit in patients with irritable bowel syndrome. METHODS: Eighteen patients with diarrhoea-predominant irritable bowel syndrome and a history of increased rectal sensitivity were randomized to receive either SB-207266-A (20 mg) or placebo for 10 days. Following a washout period, patients were then crossed over to receive the alternative therapy for 10 days. Rectal sensitivity and orocaecal transit time were assessed on day 10 of each treatment period. In addition, patients were asked whether they had experienced any changes in their symptoms. RESULTS: Fifteen patients completed the study. SB-207266-A significantly increased orocaecal transit time towards normal (placebo: 5.3 h (4.0-7.2 h), mean (IQR) vs. SB-207266-A: 6.5 h (4.8-8.0 h); P=0.027) and tended to decrease rectal sensitivity (volume to discomfort 89 mL (60-150 mL), geometric mean (IQR) vs. 107 mL (75-150 mL); P=0.134). Eleven out of 15 patients reported symptomatic improvements with SB-207266-A but none with placebo. SB-207266-A was well tolerated. CONCLUSION: Our results support a role for the 5-HT4 receptor in the pathophysiology of irritable bowel syndrome and suggest that the selective 5-HT4 antagonist, SB-207266-A, is worthy of further evaluation in this disorder.
-------------------------------------

10006966_234 - 0.915296800888 - science
[cell, cardiomyocyte, differentiation, humsc, sheet, culturing, s1p]

Sphingosine-1-phosphate promotes the differentiation of human umbilical cord mesenchymal stem cells into cardiomyocytes under the designated culturing conditions.
BACKGROUND: It is of growing interest to develop novel approaches to initiate differentiation of mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) into cardiomyocytes. The purpose of this investigation was to determine if Sphingosine-1-phosphate (S1P), a native circulating bioactive lipid metabolite, plays a role in differentiation of human umbilical cord mesenchymal stem cells (HUMSCs) into cardiomyocytes. We also developed an engineered cell sheet from these HUMSCs derived cardiomyocytes by using a temperature-responsive polymer, poly(N-isopropylacrylamide) (PIPAAm) cell sheet technology. METHODS: Cardiomyogenic differentiation of HUMSCs was performed by culturing these cells with either designated cardiomyocytes conditioned medium (CMCM) alone, or with 1 μM S1P; or DMEM with 10% FBS + 1 μM S1P. Cardiomyogenic differentiation was determined by immunocytochemical analysis of expression of cardiomyocyte markers and patch clamping recording of the action potential. RESULTS: A cardiomyocyte-like morphology and the expression of α-actinin and myosin heavy chain (MHC) proteins can be observed in both CMCM culturing or CMCM+S1P culturing groups after 5 days' culturing, however, only the cells in CMCM+S1P culture condition present cardiomyocyte-like action potential and voltage gated currents. A new approach was used to form PIPAAm based temperature-responsive culture surfaces and this successfully produced cell sheets from HUMSCs derived cardiomyocytes. CONCLUSIONS: This study for the first time demonstrates that S1P potentiates differentiation of HUMSCs towards functional cardiomyocytes under the designated culture conditions. Our engineered cell sheets may provide a potential for clinically applicable myocardial tissues should promote cardiac tissue engineering research.
-------------------------------------

10007230_234 - 0.953453188549 - science
[mutation, atrial, s140g, excitation, kcnq1, rate, fibrillation]

Pro-arrhythmogenic effects of the S140G KCNQ1 mutation in human atrial fibrillation - insights from modelling.
Key points  A previous study has identified a gene mutation (KCNQ1 S140G) in some patients with a familial form of atrial fibrillation, one of the most common cardiac rhythm disturbances causing morbidity and mortality. A causal link between the mutation and genesis of atrial fibrillation has not yet been directly demonstrated.  Increased I(Ks) arising from the KCNQ1 S140G mutation abbreviated atrial action potential duration (APD) and effective refractory period (ERP) and flattened APD and ERP restitution curves. It reduced atrial conduction velocity at low excitation rates, but increased it at high excitation rates that facilitated the conduction of high rate atrial excitation waves.  The mutation increased tissue susceptibility for initiation and maintenance of atrial arrhythmias.  The mutation stabilizes and accelerates re-entrant excitation waves, leading to rapid and sustained re-entry.  This study provides novel insights towards understanding the mechanisms underlying the pro-arrhythmic effects of the KCNQ1 S140G mutation.
-------------------------------------

10006824_234 - 0.830557731438 - science
[pulsar, modulation, energy, state]

The High Time Resolution Universe Pulsar Survey - V. Single-pulse energetics and modulation properties of 315 pulsars
We report on the pulse-to-pulse energy distributions and phase-resolved modulation properties for catalogued pulsars in the southern High Time Resolution Universe intermediate-latitude survey. We selected the 315 pulsars detected in a single-pulse search of this survey, allowing a large sample unbiased regarding any rotational parameters of neutron stars. We found that the energy distribution of many pulsars is well described by a log-normal distribution, with few deviating from a small range in log-normal scale and location parameters. Some pulsars exhibited multiple energy states corresponding to mode changes, and implying that some observed ???nulling??? may actually be a mode-change effect. PSR J1900-2600 was found to emit weakly in its previously identified ???null??? state. We found evidence for another state-change effect in two pulsars, which show bimodality in their nulling time-scales; that is, they switch between a continuous-emission state and a single-pulse-emitting state. Large modulation occurs in many pulsars across the full integrated profile, with increased sporadic bursts at leading and trailing sub-beam edges. Some of these high-energy outbursts may indicate the presence of ???giant pulse??? phenomena. We found no correlation with modulation and pulsar period, age or other parameters. Finally, the deviation of integrated pulse energy from its average value was generally quite small, despite the significant phase-resolved modulation in some pulsars; we interpret this as tenuous evidence of energy regulation between distinct pulsar sub-beams.
-------------------------------------

10005591_234 - 0.71471810441 - science
[biopsy, normal, case, colon]

Is biopsy necessary if colonoscopy is normal?
Multiple endoscopic biopsies were taken from 100 consecutive patients who had a macroscopically normal colon at colonoscopy. Of these, 78 were regarded as histologically normal; 13 cases of melanosis coli, 7 cases of intestinal spirochetosis, and 2 cases of collagenous colitis were identified. In no cases was there histologic evidence of inflammatory bowel disease. Histologic abnormality could not be predicted by retrospective analysis of various clinical, hematologic and biochemical data. In individual subjects the microscopic abnormality was present to a varying degree in all biopsies, except in intestinal spirochetosis where patchy distribution occurred in some subjects. It is therefore concluded that significant pathology may be missed without biopsy of the apparently normal colon, but in order to reduce the workload of pathology departments and shorten the duration of the examination two biopsies from the hepatic flexure and sigmoid colon may be adequate.
-------------------------------------

10006913_234 - 0.825161786094 - science
[il-15, cell, signaling, human, reverse, pc-3, membrane-bound]

Reverse signaling through membrane-bound interleukin-15.
The results from this study implicate membrane-anchored interleukin (IL)-15 constitutively expressed on the cell surface of PC-3 human prostate carcinoma cells and interferon-gamma-activated human monocytes in reverse signaling upon stimulation with soluble IL-15 receptor-alpha or anti-IL-15 antibodies, mediating the outside-to-inside signal transduction that involves the activation of members of the MAPK family (ERK and p38) and focal adhesion kinase. The presence of membrane-bound IL-15 was not dependent on the expression of the trimeric IL-15 receptor complex by these cells and resisted treatment with acidic buffer or trypsin. Reverse signaling through membrane-bound IL-15 considerably increased the production of several pro-inflammatory cytokines by monocytes, such as IL-6, IL-8, and tumor necrosis factor-alpha, thereby indicating the relevance of this process to the complex immunomodulatory function of these cells. Furthermore, stimulation of transmembrane IL-15 also enhanced the transcription of IL-6 and IL-8 in the PC-3 cell line and promoted migration of PC-3 cells as well as LNCaP human prostate carcinoma cells stably expressing IL-15 on the cell surface. Thus, IL-15 can exist as a biologically active transmembrane molecule that possesses dual ligand-receptor qualities with a potential to induce bidirectional signaling. This fact highlights a new level of complexity in the biology of IL-15 and offers novel important insights into our understanding of the cellular responses modulated by this pleiotropic cytokine.
-------------------------------------

10006806_234 - 0.816031685832 - science
[pulsar, survey]

The High Time Resolution Universe Pulsar Survey - I. System configuration and initial discoveries
We have embarked on a survey for pulsars and fast transients using the13-beam multibeam receiver on the Parkes Radio Telescope. Installationof a digital backend allows us to record 400 MHz of bandwidth for eachbeam, split into 1024 channels and sampled every 64 {$\mu$}s. Limits of thereceiver package restrict us to a 340 MHz observing band centred at 1352MHz. The factor of 8 improvement in frequency resolution over previousmultibeam surveys allows us to probe deeper into the Galactic plane forshort-duration signals such as the pulses from millisecond pulsars. Weplan to survey the entire southern sky in 42641 pointings, split intolow, mid and high Galactic latitude regions, with integration times of4200, 540 and 270 s, respectively. Simulations suggest that we willdiscover 400 pulsars, of which 75 will be millisecond pulsars. With \ {}30per cent of the mid-latitude survey complete, we have redetected 223previously known pulsars and discovered 27 pulsars, five of which aremillisecond pulsars. The newly discovered millisecond pulsars tend tohave larger dispersion measures than those discovered in previoussurveys, as expected from the improved time and frequency resolution ofour instrument.
-------------------------------------

10005636_234 - 0.753352374083 - science
[ultrasound, abnormality, ibs, female, male]

Does routine abdominal ultrasound enhance diagnostic accuracy in irritable bowel syndrome?
OBJECTIVE: The current recommendation that irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) should be diagnosed positively using minimum investigation raises the possibility that some disorders, particularly gynecological, may be overlooked. Transabdominal ultrasound is now sufficiently sophisticated to allow assessment of all abdominal viscera for associated pathology, and this study was designed to evaluate its role in the diagnosis of IBS. METHODS: An ultrasound scan was performed in 125 patients (100 females, 25 males) for whom a confident diagnosis of IBS had been made. RESULTS: No serious intra-abdominal pathology was encountered, but 20% of females and 8% of males had an ultrasound abnormality. None of these abnormalities resulted in any additional therapeutic measures. A hepatobiliary abnormality was found in similar proportions of males and females (10 vs 8%). Gallstones were most common (5 vs 4%), but in no individual were they considered to entirely account for the presenting symptoms. Eight percent of the women were found to have a pelvic abnormality, but it was not regarded as serious in any of them. CONCLUSIONS: This study confirms that a positive approach to diagnosing IBS is a safe policy. Furthermore, routine ultrasound scanning in IBS is unnecessary and could be counter-productive by detecting many minor abnormalities, which can pose further therapeutic dilemmas.
-------------------------------------

10006895_234 - 0.817441734429 - science
[il-21, il-21ralpha, mphi, cell, cd4, role, function, mphus, proliferation]

Interleukin-21 stimulates antigen uptake, protease activity, survival and induction of CD4+ T cell proliferation by murine macrophages.
Interleukin (IL)-21 is a T cell-derived cytokine which uses a heterodimeric receptor, composed of the common gamma-chain (CD132) and an IL-21Ralpha-chain. IL-21 activates lymphoid T and B cells, modulates antibody production but also suppresses maturation of myeloid dendritic cells; however, its role in the differentiation and function of other myeloid cells remains less clear. In this study we analysed IL-21/IL-21Ralpha effects on macrophage (MPhi) differentiation and function. MPhi could be generated readily from bone marrow with MPhi-colony-stimulating factor in the presence of IL-21 (designated IL-21MPhi) or from IL-21Ralpha-/- mice. IL-21Ralpha-/- mice had normal MPhi numbers, suggesting a non-essential role of both IL-21 and the IL-21Ralpha for MPhi generation. We could demonstrate that mature MPhi express the IL-21Ralpha and the common gamma-chain. However, short-term IL-21 stimulation did not enhance MPhi proliferation but induced anti-apoptotic cell-cycle regulators p21(waf1)/p27(Kip1) and expression of suppressors of cytokine signalling (SOCS)2/SOCS3. Moreover, IL-21 enhanced phagocytosis by MPhi via IL-21Ralpha signalling and supports protease activity and matrix metalloproteinase 12 expression. Stimulating MPhi with IL-21 enhanced their capacity to induce antigen-specific CD4+ T cell proliferation in dependence from the IL-21Ralpha, which was not the case for CD8+ T cells. Taken together, IL-21 plays a previously unrecognized role in modulating innate and acquired effector mechanisms of murine MPhi by linking these different functions to support CD4+ T cell-mediated immune responses.
-------------------------------------

10005682_234 - 0.766219627064 - science
[testosterone, level, patient, hormone, male, ib, lower, lh, sex, control, distension, ibs]

Do male sex hormones protect from irritable bowel syndrome?
OBJECTIVE: Irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) is more common in women and it is frequently assumed that being female may predispose to the development of this disorder. Alternatively, being male could offer some degree of protection and if so, this might be mediated by testosterone. The aim of this study was to assess whether male patients with IBS have lower levels of testosterone and related gonadotrophins than their unaffected counterparts and if this relates to rectal sensitivity. METHODS: Fifty secondary care, male outpatients with IBS (aged 19-71 yr) were compared with 25 controls (aged 22-67 yr). Each subject had serum testosterone, free testosterone, sex hormone-binding globulin, follicle stimulating hormone, and luteinizing hormone (LH) measured, together with rectal sensitivity to balloon distension. Anxiety and depression were also assessed. RESULTS: The only difference in the hormone levels between patients and controls that reached statistical significance was the lower value for LH in the IBS patients (p = 0.014). Although patients were more anxious and depressed than the controls (p < 0.001), this could not solely account for the reduced level of LH, as adjusting for these (analysis of variance) still tended to show that LH values were lower in men with rather than without IBS F(1,70) = 2.74; p = 0.10. Men with IBS were more sensitive to balloon distension of the rectum, with the distension volumes required for "urgency" (p < 0.001) and "discomfort" (p = 0.001) significantly lower than controls. Paradoxically, the patient's sensory thresholds negatively correlated with levels of testosterone (p < 0.05) and free testosterone (p < 0.002), and positively with levels of sex hormone-binding globulin (p < 0.05). Finally, there was a tendency for IBS symptomatology to be inversely related to testosterone levels (p = 0.15). CONCLUSIONS: These results support the need for further exploration of the role of male sex hormones in the pathophysiology of IBS.
-------------------------------------

10007156_234 - 0.7675937577 - science
[research, baker, physiol, physiology, kingdom, mark]

eNOS knockout mouse as a model of fetal growth restriction with an impaired uterine artery function and placental transport phenotype
Kusinski, Laura C Stanley, Joanna L Dilworth, Mark R Hirt, Cassandra J Andersson, Irene J Renshall, Lewis J Baker, Bernadette C Baker, Philip N Sibley, Colin P Wareing, Mark Glazier, Jocelyn D 92495/Medical Research Council/United Kingdom Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research Council/United Kingdom Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't United States American journal of physiology. Regulatory, integrative and comparative physiology Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol. 2012 Jul 1;303(1):R86-93. Epub 2012 May 2.
-------------------------------------

10006928_234 - 0.930402380828 - science
[opsin, response, andruzzius, nm, spectral, sensitivity]

Encephalic photoreception and phototactic response in the troglobiont Somalian blind cavefish Phreatichthys andruzzii.
Many physiological and behavioural responses to changes in environmental lighting conditions are mediated by extraocular photoreceptors. Here we investigate encephalic photoreception in Phreatichthys andruzzii, a typical cave-dwelling fish showing an extreme phenotype with complete anophthalmy and a reduction in size of associated brain structures. We firstly identified two P. andruzzii photopigments, orthologues of rod opsin and exo-rod opsin. In vitro, both opsins serve as light-absorbing photopigments with λ(max) around 500 nm when reconstituted with an A(1) chromophore. When corrected for the summed absorption from the skin and skull, the spectral sensitivity profiles shifted to longer wavelengths (rod opsin: 521 nm; exo-rod opsin: 520 nm). We next explored the involvement of both opsins in the negative phototaxis reported for this species. A comparison of the spectral sensitivity of the photophobic response with the putative A(2) absorbance spectra corrected for skin/skull absorbance indicates that the A(2) versions of either or both of these pigments could explain the observed behavioural spectral sensitivity.
-------------------------------------

10005648_234 - 0.780435973369 - medicine
[infection, irritable, syndrome, bowel, chlamydial, patient, trachomati, symptom, result]

Chlamydia trachomatis infection: is it relevant in irritable bowel syndrome?
BACKGROUND: Irritable bowel syndrome can present with gynaecological symptoms similar to those of chronic pelvic inflammatory disease, which is commonly caused by Chlamydia trachomatis. Infection with this organism might therefore lead to diagnostic and management difficulties in patients, not only as a result of symptom overlap between the two disorders but also because chlamydial infection might exacerbate the symptoms of irritable bowel syndrome. This study was designed to investigate any possible link between chlamydial infection and irritable bowel syndrome. PATIENTS/METHODS: The prevalence of antibodies to C. trachomatis and abdominal symptomatology was assessed in a group of 100 female patients with irritable bowel syndrome and 100 matched female controls. RESULTS: 25% of patients and 17% of controls were found to have evidence of previous chlamydial infection. This difference was not statistically significant. Within the patient group, no association was found between chlamydial infection and any particular pattern of symptomatology. CONCLUSIONS: The results of this study indicate that occult chlamydial infection is not a major problem in irritable bowel syndrome and that routine investigation for this organism is unnecessary. They also provide some reassurance that pelvic inflammatory disease and all its potentially serious consequences is not being significantly overlooked in gastroenterological practice.
-------------------------------------

10005605_234 - 0.93121945192 - medicine
[azathioprine, crohn, disease, patient, totali, hair, drug, alopecia, treatment]

Alopecia totalis in a patient with Crohn's disease and its treatment with azathioprine.
A patient with Crohn's disease and alopecia totalis is described. Despite relative inactivity of the Crohn's disease, treatment with azathioprine was commenced. This led to complete regrowth of hair which was lost when the drug was discontinued. Re-institution of azathioprine restored hair to normal again and the patient has since declined to try stopping the drug despite the knowledge of potential side effects.
-------------------------------------

10005670_234 - 0.820892921968 - science
[oesophageal, sumatriptan, mmhg, motility]

Altered oesophageal motility following the administration of the 5-HT1 agonist, sumatriptan.
BACKGROUND: The 5-HT1 agonist sumatriptan, used in the treatment of migraine, can cause chest pain. AIM: To investigate the effect of a therapeutic dose of sumatriptan (6 mg s.c.) on oesophageal motility. METHODS: In 16 normal healthy subjects aged 19-32 years (9 males), the manometric response of the lower oesophageal sphincter (sleeve sensor), oesophageal body (four sites), stomach and pharynx (to register swallows) to 5 mL water swallows was assessed before and after a subcutaneous injection of either sumatriptan (6 mg) or saline control. Symptoms and ECGs were also monitored. RESULTS: Sumatriptan 6 mg s.c. altered oesophageal motility in all subjects. This was reflected by a significant increase in the amplitude of oesophageal body contractions (change from pre- to 1 h post-injection: sumatriptan 9.9 (2.8, 17.1) mmHg vs. placebo -0.8 (-4.2, 2.6) mmHg, difference 10.8 (4.4, 17.1) mmHg; P=0.003) and a transient increase in lower oesophageal sphincter pressure (change from pre- to 5 min post-injection: sumatriptan 10.9 (5.2, 16.6) mmHg vs. placebo 5.1 (1.8, 8.4) mmHg, difference 5.8 (-0.7, 12.3) mmHg; P=0.08). Sumatriptan had no effect on the velocity of propagation of oesophageal contractions (change from pre- to 1 h post-injection: sumatriptan -0.1 (-0.3, 0.1) cm/s vs. placebo -0.1 (-0.3, 0.0) cm/s, difference 0.1 (-0.1, 0.2) cm/s; P = 0.40). One subject experienced chest symptoms following sumatriptan and, although motility was altered, this did not reach pathological levels. No ECG abnormalities were observed. CONCLUSION: Sumatriptan (6 mg s.c.) significantly alters oesophageal motor function without affecting the ECG. It is therefore possible that sumatriptan-induced chest symptoms may have an oesophageal origin. The evaluation of similar therapeutic agents for migraine on oesophageal function may be justified.
-------------------------------------

10005585_234 - 0.934588404397 - medicine
[patient, bowel, syndrome, irritable, hypnotherapy, case]

Hypnotherapy in severe irritable bowel syndrome: further experience.
Fifteen patients with severe intractable irritable bowel syndrome previously reported as successfully treated with hypnotherapy, have now been followed up for a mean duration of 18 months. All patients remain in remission although two have experienced a single relapse overcome by an additional session of hypnotherapy. Experience with a further 35 patients is reported giving a total group of 50. This group was divided into classical cases, atypical cases and cases exhibiting significant psychopathology. The response rates were 95%, 43%, and 60% respectively. Patients over the age of 50 years responded very poorly (25%) whereas those below the age of 50 with classical irritable bowel syndrome exhibited a 100% response rate. This study confirms the successful effect of hypnotherapy in a larger series of patients with irritable bowel syndrome and defines some subgroup variations.
-------------------------------------

10006918_234 - 0.866884848651 - science
[polymer, pile, effect, fluid, support, trial]

Effect of support fluids on pile performance - a field trial in east London
Synthetic polymer support fluids have been used in the UK for about a decade, although naturally derived polymers such as xanthan gum have been used for much longer. Very little research has been carried out to assess the effects of polymer fluids and especially synthetic polymers on pile performance.A field trial comprising the construction and testing of three piles has been carried out at Stratford in east London. The objectives of the trial were to compare the effects of polymer and bentonite support fluids on pile performance, to assess the effect of extended bore open time for the polymer piles, and to quantify the effect of support fluid contamination on the hardened properties of concrete. It was found that the two polymer piles significantly outperformed the bentonite pile under the maximum proof load, and that no adverse effect was caused by the extended soil-fluid exposure time in the polymer-supported bore. The two support fluids were also found to have similar effects on concrete quality.
-------------------------------------

10005686_234 - 0.913601600586 - medicine
[abatacept, long-term, treatment, clinical, rheumatoid, therapy, response, drug, progression, arthritis, patient]

Abatacept in the long-term treatment of rheumatoid arthritis.
The last decade has been an era of exciting and innovative therapeutic targets in the treatment of moderate-to-severe rheumatoid arthritis. One such treatment that acts by disrupting T-cell activation is abatacept, which is currently used in patients who have had an inadequate clinical response to traditional disease-modifying drugs or anti-TNF therapies. As newer therapies emerge, issues that need addressing include: long-term drug tolerance, adverse events, sustained clinical response, prevention of progression in structural damage and retention rates. In this article we discuss a recently published paper by Kremer et al. that reported 3-year data on safety, efficacy and radiographic progression in patients enrolled in a clinical trial of abatacept, as well as the advantages and limitations of long-term extension studies.
-------------------------------------

10006799_234 - 0.788356658191 - science
[radio, pulsar, gamma, psr, x-ray, timing, ray, j1124-5916, observation]

Precise {$\gamma$}-ray Timing and Radio Observations of 17 Fermi {$\gamma$}-ray Pulsars
We present precise phase-connected pulse timing solutions for 16{$\gamma$}-ray-selected pulsars recently discovered using the Large AreaTelescope (LAT) on the Fermi Gamma-ray Space Telescope plus one veryfaint radio pulsar (PSR J1124-5916) that is more effectively timed withthe LAT. We describe the analysis techniques including a maximumlikelihood method for determining pulse times of arrival from unbinnedphoton data. A major result of this work is improved positiondeterminations, which are crucial for multiwavelength follow-up. Formost of the pulsars, we overlay the timing localizations on X-ray imagesfrom Swift and describe the status of X-ray counterpart associations. Wereport glitches measured in PSRs J0007+7303, J1124-5916, and J1813-1246.We analyze a new 20 ks Chandra ACIS observation of PSR J0633+0632 thatreveals an arcminute-scale X-ray nebula extending to the south of thepulsar. We were also able to precisely localize the X-ray point sourcecounterpart to the pulsar and find a spectrum that can be described byan absorbed blackbody or neutron star atmosphere with a hard power-lawcomponent. Another Chandra ACIS image of PSR J1732-3131 reveals a faintX-ray point source at a location consistent with the timing position ofthe pulsar. Finally, we present a compilation of new and archivalsearches for radio pulsations from each of the {$\gamma$}-ray-selectedpulsars as well as a new Parkes radio observation of PSR J1124-5916 toestablish the {$\gamma$}-ray to radio phase offset.
-------------------------------------

10007128_234 - 0.707014655297 - technology_and_computing
[model, term, linear]

Testing linearity in semiparametric regression models
One of the fundamental assumptions of a basic multiple linear regression model is that the contribution of each of the model terms is strictly linear. In many cases, this may be an excessive simplification of the complicated relationships.Moreover, it may be difficult or impossible to test the hypothesized model against all possible kinds of relevant alternative models. Therefore, tests that perform well under more general circumstances are also required. This paper considers the semiparametric model, where the contribution of one of the model terms may not be strictly linear, and also proposes an exact F-test for the situation. The methodalso allows dependent error terms. The performance of the proposed test is illustrated by simulation experiments and in real air pollution and health data.
-------------------------------------

10005596_234 - 0.914590815114 - medicine
[hypnotherapy, patient, ulceration, duodenal]

Controlled trial of hypnotherapy in relapse prevention of duodenal ulceration.
30 patients with rapidly relapsing duodenal ulceration were studied to assess the possible benefit of hypnotherapy in relapse prevention. After the ulcer had healed on treatment with ranitidine, the drug was continued for a further 10 weeks during which time patients received either hypnotherapy or no hypnotherapy. The two randomly selected groups were comparable in terms of age, sex, smoking habits, and alcohol consumption. Follow-up of both groups of patients was continued for 12 months after the cessation of ranitidine. After 1 year, 8 (53%) of the hypnotherapy patients and 15 (100%) of the control subjects had relapsed. The results of this study suggest that hypnotherapy may be a useful therapeutic adjunct for some patients with chronic recurrent duodenal ulceration.
-------------------------------------

10006813_234 - 0.819574003775 - science
[pulsar, psr, gamma-ray, search, frequency]

DISCOVERY OF NINE GAMMA-RAY PULSARS IN FERMI LARGE AREA TELESCOPE DATA USING A NEW BLIND SEARCH METHOD
We report the discovery of nine previously unknown gamma-ray pulsars in a blind search of data from the Fermi Large Area Telescope (LAT). The pulsars were found with a novel hierarchical search method originally developed for detecting continuous gravitational waves from rapidly rotating neutron stars. Designed to find isolated pulsars spinning at up to kHz frequencies, the new method is computationally efficient and incorporates several advances, including a metric-based gridding of the search parameter space (frequency, frequency derivative, and sky location) and the use of photon probability weights. The nine pulsars have spin frequencies between 3 and 12 Hz, and characteristic ages ranging from 17 kyr to 3 Myr. Two of them, PSRs J1803-2149 and J2111+ 4606, are young and energetic Galactic-plane pulsars (spin-down power above 6 ?? 1035 erg s???1 and ages below 100 kyr). The seven remaining pulsars, PSRs J0106+4855, J0622+3749, J1620-4927, J1746-3239, J2028+3332, J2030+4415, and J2139+4716, are older and less energetic; two of them are located at higher Galactic latitudes (|b| \&gt; 10??). PSR J0106+4855 has the largest characteristic age (3 Myr) and the smallest surface magnetic field (2 ?? 1011 G) of all LAT blind-search pulsars. PSR J2139+4716 has the lowest spin-down power (3 ?? 1033 erg s???1) among all non-recycled gamma-ray pulsars ever found. Despite extensive multi-frequency observations, only PSR J0106+4855 has detectable pulsations in the radio band. The other eight pulsars belong to the increasing population of radio-quiet gamma-ray pulsars.
-------------------------------------

10005692_234 - 0.814284879752 - medicine
[disease, prevalence, diverticular, patient]

Prevalence of diverticular disease of the colon in patients with ischaemic heart disease.
In view of the similar patterns of incidence of diverticular disease of the colon (DD) and ischaemic heart disease (IHD) in different communities, the prevalence of diverticular disease was investigated in male patients after recovery from acute myocardial infarction. A significantly higher prevalence of DD was found among infarct patients (57%) than among male control subjects (25%) matched for age and social class.
-------------------------------------

10005600_234 - 0.856377003079 - science
[nicardipine, bowel, syndrome, motility, irritable, colonic]

Reduction of colonic motility by intravenous nicardipine in irritable bowel syndrome.
The effect of nicardipine, a new dihydropyridine calcium antagonist, on postprandial colonic motility was assessed in 10 patients with irritable bowel syndrome. Each patient was studied twice receiving intravenously either N saline or nicardipine after a 1000 calorie meal. In the control study there was a significant (p less than 0.01) postprandial increase in the contractile activity of the colon, reaching a peak at approximately 20 minutes. Intravenous nicardipine completely abolished the colonic response, with a significant reduction in the number (p less than 0.005) and amplitude (p less than 0.005) of contractions and of the motility index (p less than 0.025). These results support the need for further studies to evaluate the therapeutic role of nicardipine in the irritable bowel syndrome.
-------------------------------------

10005626_234 - 0.874936399333 - science
[hypnosis, motility, colonic, effect, rate, emotion, physiological, change]

Physiological effects of emotion: assessment via hypnosis.
Assessment of the physiological effects of physical and emotional stress has been hampered by a lack of suitable laboratory techniques. Since hypnosis can be used safely to induce specific emotional states of considerable intensity, we studied the effect on distal colonic motility of three hypnotically induced emotions (excitement, anger, and happiness) in 18 patients aged 20-48 years with irritable bowel syndrome. Colonic motility index was reduced by hypnosis on its own (mean change 19.1; 95% CI 0.8, 37.3; p less than 0.05) and this change was accompanied by decreases in both pulse (12; 8, 15) and respiration (6; 4, 8) rates (p less than 0.001 for both). Anger and excitement increased the colonic motility index (50.8; 29.4, 72.2; and 30.4; 8.9, 51.9, respectively; p less than 0.01 for both), pulse rate (26; 22, 30; and 28; 24, 32; p less than 0.001 for both), and respiration rate (14; 12, 16; and 12; 10, 14; p less than 0.001 for both). Happiness further reduced colonic motility although not significantly from that observed during hypnosis alone. Changes in motility were mainly due to alterations in rate than in amplitude of contractions. Our results indicate that hypnosis may help in the investigation of the effects of emotion on physiological functions; this approach could be useful outside the gastrointestinal system. Our observation that hypnosis strikingly reduces fasting colonic motility may partly explain the beneficial effects of this form of therapy in functional bowel disorders.
-------------------------------------

10005797_234 - 0.770904587933 - science
[sensor, ammonia, black, composite, solution, pani]

Highly Sensitive Detection of Ammonia Using Solution Processable Polyaniline/Carbon Black Composite Sensors
A highly sensitive ammonia sensor has been fabricated by depositing solution processable
polyaniline/carbon black conductive composites on to flexible plastic substrates with gold
interdigitated electrodes. Polyaniline (PANI) is known to be an excellent sensing material for
ammonia, since NH3 deprotonates the amine group in emeraldine salt (doped form of PANI),
converting it to emeraldine base (undoped form) which may cause a significant decrease in
conductivity. The very high affinity of PANI to ammonia has its drawbacks, mainly with regard to
sensor recovery where long timescales are required to return the sensor to its baseline. Operation at
elevated temperatures can improve desorption of NH3 molecules from the sensor film, hence
improving the recovery time.
Unfortunately, lack of solution processability, the inherent problem with conventional PANI
especially in its doped stat, has limited implementation of this material in conventional sensor
fabrication methods. Here, we have exploited sulphosuccinic acid (SSA), a multifunctional dopant
with sulphonic and carboxylic acid groups, which not only renders the doped PANI soluble in aprotic
solvents such as n-methyl pyrrolidone (NMP), but also makes it possible to prepare conductive
composites of PANI/carbon black (CB) simply by mixing surface modified carbon black with PANI
solution. Sensors were fabricated by depositing a thin layer of PANI/CB dispersion in NMP via dip
coating on flexible polyimide and polyethylene naphthalate substrates incorporating a heater.
Sensor response to very low concentrations of ammonia vapour at 80 ˚C was measured. Due to
high affinity of polyaniline to ammonia and presence of conductive pathways of carbon black
through out the composite layer, the sensor exhibits sensitive and fast response down to ppb
concentrations. The high sensitivity, rapid response and good reversibility of the sensor make it
promising for real-time ammonia sensing applications.
-------------------------------------

10007012_234 - 0.842377515507 - science
[aerosol, equilibrium, partitioning, gas-aerosol, model, nitrate, ammonium, altitude]

Modelling the partitioning of ammonium nitrate in the convective boundary layer
An explanatory model study is presented on semi-volatile secondary inorganic aerosols on three clear days in May 2008 during the IMPACT campaign at the Cabauw tower in the Netherlands. A single column model in combination with the equilibrium aerosol model ISORROPIA is used. This model uses surface observations from IMPACT and calculates the gas-aerosol partitioning of ammonium nitrate. The calculated gas-aerosol equilibrium overestimates the gas phase fraction during daytime, and overestimates the aerosol phase fraction during night-time. This discrepancy can partly be solved when the approach of the gas-aerosol equilibrium is forced to proceed with a delay timescale of up to two hours. Although it is shown that the delay itself has a small effect, the most important effect is caused by the mixing of air from higher altitudes at which the equilibrium is shifted to the aerosol phase. Thus, vertical mixing is shown to have a significant influence on the calculated partitioning at the surface. On some occasions, the correspondence to the observed partitioning improves dramatically. </br > Even though gas-aerosol partitioning of ammonium nitrate is not instantaneous, observations show that a different equilibrium in the upper boundary layer causes aerosol ammonium nitrate concentrations to increase with altitude. Our model calculates similar vertical gradients depending on the assumed speed of gas-aerosol equilibrium. The calculated optical properties of the aerosol show a similar behaviour. The aerosol optical properties depend on the aerosol size distribution both directly, because light scattering depends on particle size, and indirectly, because the equilibration timescale depends on the aerosol sizes. Future studies should therefore focus on a fully size-resolved treatment of the gas-aerosol partitioning. </br > Finally, coarser-resolution models may treat the gas-aerosol equilibrium of ammonium nitrate by calculating the equilibrium with a temperature and humidity sampled at a different altitude. We found that the equilibrium at an altitude of 200 m (night) up to 600 m (day) is representative for the partitioning of ammonium nitrate at the surface in the beginning of May 2008.
-------------------------------------

10005609_234 - 0.914596227382 - medicine
[patient, oesophageal, coronary, disease, normal, angiogram, reflux, abnormality, gastro-oesophageal, angina, pectoris]

Oesophageal function in patients with angina pectoris: a comparison of patients with normal coronary angiograms and patients with coronary artery disease.
Oesophageal function was assessed in 52 patients with angina pectoris whose coronary angiograms were completely normal and in 21 patients with angina pectoris who had significant coronary artery disease. During a standard oesophageal manometric study, abnormalities were found in 23 (44%) patients with normal coronary angiograms but in only 2 (10%) patients with coronary artery disease (p less than 0.01). Twenty-four (46%) patients with normal coronary angiograms were found to have gastro-oesophageal reflux disease during 24-hour oesophageal pH monitoring. Of the 52 patients with normal coronary angiograms, 19 (37%) had gastro-oesophageal reflux disease and abnormal oesophageal motility, 5 (10%) had gastro-oesophageal reflux disease alone, and 7 (13%) had oesophageal motility disorder alone. The use of provocation procedures, including intravenous edrophonium during oesophageal manometry and treadmill exercise testing during pH monitoring, enabled the oesophageal abnormality to be demonstrated simultaneously with chest pain in 25 of these 31 patients. Typical angina pectoris, coincident with abnormal oesophageal motility, was precipitated in a subgroup of patients who had been shown to have oesophageal manometric abnormalities and gastro-oesophageal reflux disease by the infusion of hydrochloric acid into the oesophagus; both the chest pain and manometric abnormality resolved following the oral administration of antacid.
-------------------------------------

