10008302_234 - 0.906002827059 - science
[phosphorylation, protein, detection, method]

Detection of low-abundance protein phosphorylation by selective (18)o labeling and mass spectrometry.
Reversible phosphorylation regulates the majority of intracellular networking and pathways. The study of this widely explored post-translational modification is usually challenged by low stoichiometric levels of modification. Many approaches have been developed to overcome this problem and to achieve rigorous characterization of protein phosphorylation. We describe a method for enhanced detection of low-abundance protein phosphorylation that uses selective introduction of (18)O label into phosphorylation sites with H(2)(18)O and mass spectrometric detection. The method was applied to introduce (18)O label into bacterially expressed Aurora A kinase phosphorylation sites and resulted in the representation of phosphorylated peptides as doublets or triplets according to the number of phosphate groups. A total of 28 phosphopeptides were observed by this method.
-------------------------------------

10011880_234 - 0.966310488161 - education
[school, education, barrier, student, inclusive]

RESPONDING TO STUDENT DIVERSITY: TWO CASES IN CYPRUS
This study set out to examine how the Cypriot educational context is structuredto promote inclusive education to cater for the needs of the increasingly diversestudent population in Greek-Cypriot public schools. Emphasis was given toidentifying barriers to the inclusive education of non-Greek-Cypriot students.Ways of addressing these barriers, and therefore ways to promote an inclusiveand essentially a multicultural education in schools in Cyprus, were explored.The research design involved the evaluation of two cases: a primary school inLimassol and a secondary school in Nicosia. Both schools catered for anethnically diverse student population. The use of a multi-method techniqueallowed primarily for the exploration of the “voices” of pupils in these schools, onthe topic of inclusive educational provision present in their schools. Teachers’interviews extended the image of the inclusive & multicultural education as itexisted in the schools studied.During the study the most significant barrier to non-Greek-Cypriot students’inclusion appeared to be the lack of Greek language skills, which affects theirsocialization, participation and achievement at school. Other barriers lie with thenegative attitudes of classmates and teaching staff in schools. It is recommendedthat a unified governmental attempt to provide assistance with learning the Greeklanguage in both Primary and Secondary education, and in eliminating negativeattitudes towards non-Greek-Cypriot students could greatly improve theirlearning experiences and inclusion in schools.
-------------------------------------

10015082_234 - 0.849647578972 - science
[gene, signaling, nutrient, acid, role, transporter]

The potassium-dependent transcriptome of arabidopsis reveals a prominent role of jasmonic acid in nutrient signaling
Full genome microarrays were used to assess transcriptional responses of Arabidopsis seedlings to changing external supply of the essential macronutrient potassium (K+). Rank product statistics and iterative group analysis were employed to identify differentially regulated genes and statistically significant coregulated sets of functionally related genes. The most prominent response was found for genes linked to the phytohormone jasmonic acid (JA). Transcript levels for the JA biosynthetic enzymes lipoxygenase, allene oxide synthase, and allene oxide cyclase were strongly increased during K+ starvation and quickly decreased after K+ resupply. A large number of well-known JA responsive genes showed the same expression profile, including genes involved in storage of amino acids (VSP), glucosinolate production (CYP79), polyamine biosynthesis (ADC2), and defense (PDF1.2). Our findings highlight a novel role of JA in nutrient signaling and stress management through a variety of physiological processes such as nutrient storage, recycling, and reallocation. Other highly significant K+-responsive genes discovered in our study encoded cell wall proteins (e.g. extensins and arabinogalactans) and ion transporters (e.g. the high-affinity K+ transporter HAK5 and the nitrate transporter NRT2.1) as well as proteins with a putative role in Ca2+ signaling (e.g. calmodulins). On the basis of our results, we propose candidate genes involved in K+ perception and signaling as well as a network of molecular processes underlying plant adaptation to K + deficiency. ?? 2004 American Society of Plant Biologists.
-------------------------------------

10010315_234 - 0.765021982343 - science
[adipose, diabetes, type]

Robust signaling networks of the adipose secretome
Type 2 diabetes is a prototypical complex systems disease that has a strong hereditary component and etiologic links with a sedentary lifestyle, overeating and obesity. Adipose tissue has been shown to be a central driver of type 2 diabetes progression, establishing and maintaining a chronic state of low-level inflammation. The number and diversity of identified endocrine factors from adipose tissue (adipokines) is growing rapidly. Here, I argue that a systems biology approach to understanding the robust multi-level signaling networks established by the adipose secretome will be crucial for developing efficient type 2 diabetes treatment. Recent advances in whole-genome association studies, global molecular profiling and quantitative modeling are currently fueling the emergence of this novel research strategy. ?? 2008 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
-------------------------------------

10017112_234 - 0.946935693063 - medicine
[psoriasis, patient, chronic, plaque, guttate, blood, streptococcus]

Evidence for the presence of bacteria in the blood of psoriasis patients.
Evidence exists that microorganisms, particularly in the throat and skin, play a role in the pathogenesis of psoriasis. The aim of this study was to investigate whether evidence for the presence of bacteria, including Streptococcus pyogenes, can be demonstrated in the peripheral blood of patients with guttate and/or chronic plaque psoriasis. Peripheral blood samples from 20 patients with psoriasis, seven guttate, six chronic plaque and seven chronic plaque with associated guttate flare and from 16 control subjects were studied for the presence of bacteria by PCR using universal 16S ribosomal DNA primers and specific primers for S. pyogenes. Sequence analysis of amplified 16S rRNA sequences was used to determine taxonomic identity. Ribosomal bacterial DNA was detected in the blood of all 20 patients with psoriasis, but in none of the controls. Streptococci were detected in six of seven patients with guttate psoriasis, but none had staphylococci. In contrast, staphylococci were identified in 9 of 13 patients with chronic plaque psoriasis, whilst only 2 demonstrated streptococci. In three psoriasis patients, species other than streptococci and staphylococci were identified. These findings suggest that psoriasis is associated with bacteraemia, with distinct taxonomic groups present in guttate and chronic plaque psoriatic subtypes. The causes of the bacteraemia and its implications in psoriasis have yet to be determined.
-------------------------------------

10005599_234 - 0.753384953412 - medicine
[agonist, bowel, syndrome, irritable, lidamidine, alpha, study, double-blind, abdominal, frequency]

Double-blind study of an alpha 2 agonist in the treatment of irritable bowel syndrome.
A double-blind crossover trial of the alpha 2 agonist lidamidine hydrochloride in 72 patients with irritable bowel syndrome is reported. Lidamidine was found to have no significant effect on frequency and severity of abdominal pain or abdominal bloating. It did cause a statistically significant reduction in frequency of defaecation (P = 0.005), but this was of a degree unlikely to be of clinical importance. Although alpha 2 agonists inhibit gastrointestinal motility in animals this study suggests that lidamidine hydrochloride does not have a useful therapeutic role in irritable bowel syndrome.
-------------------------------------

10018161_234 - 0.777081352317 - science
[cell, color, fabric, electron, cotton, removal, process]

Bio-bleaching of Dyed Cotton Fabric Using a Bacterial Catalyst
Anaerobically grown cells of Shewanella strain J18 143 were able to bio-bleach the color from cotton fabric that was dyed with Remazol Black B (C. I. Reactive Black 5), a common diazo reactive dye. This bio-bleaching process, involving a bacterial catalyst, offers potential benefits to the color industry as the removal of color from dyed fabric opens up the potential for fabric re-use. Growing cells removed the color with greater efficiency than that achieved using pre-grown ``resting{''} cells. Assays of resting cells were used to determine the effect of cell concentration and depth of shade of the dyeing on the color removal process. Further resting cell assays were carried out to ascertain if an electron donor was required for the color removal process, and suggested that the cotton substrate could supply some reducing power to the biocatalyst, although dye reduction rates were maximal with added electron donor (formate). The Shewanella cells were also able to remove the color from dyed cotton fabric that was isolated inside a dialysis membrane to prevent contact with the cells. This indicates that Shewanella strain J18 143 is able to synthesize and excrete endogenous extracellular electron shuttles, eliminating the need for direct contact between the intracellular electron transport components and the extracellular terminal electron acceptors. The dyed cotton fabric was assessed visually, and by reflectance spectroscopy and environmental scanning electron microscopy.
-------------------------------------

10008608_234 - 0.87887819633 - science
[cytokine, sensitization, epidermal, skin, lc, cell, induction, langerhan]

Epidermal cytokines and skin sensitization hazard.
The induction phase of skin sensitization is associated with the passage of antigen-bearing Langerhans cells (LC) from the epidermis to the draining lymph nodes. Recent investigations have revealed that the induction of LC migration following topical sensitization is dependent on tumour necrosis factor alpha (TNF-alpha), an epidermal cytokine. While in transit to the lymph nodes LC are subject to both phenotypic and functional maturation which, by analogy with in vitro studies, is also effected by epidermal cytokines (granulocyte/macrophage colony-stimulating factor, GM-CSF and interleukin-1, IL-1). It is now apparent that Langerhans cell function, the induction of cutaneous immune responses and effective sensitization are dependent on the availability of such cytokines and that contact allergens are able to provoke their production by keratinocytes and by Langerhans cells themselves. The development of screening strategies for the evaluation of skin sensitization potential as a function of epidermal cytokine production is discussed.
-------------------------------------

10007510_234 - 0.96703984964 - medicine
[g-csf, patient, ctrt, thrombocytopenia, grade, datum, radiotherapy, lung, cancer, trial]

Use of G-CSF during concurrent chemotherapy and thoracic radiotherapy in patients with limited-stage small-cell lung cancer safety data from a phase II trial.
There is paucity of data in the literature regarding the safety of combining granulocyte colony stimulating factor (G-CSF) during chemo-radiotherapy (CTRT) in lung cancer patients. The ASCO 2006 recommendations advise against use of CSFs during concomitant mediastinal CTRT. The only randomised study evaluating CSFs in this context showed significant increase in grade 3/4 thrombocytopenia and an excess of pulmonary toxic deaths. In the context of a phase II trial, 38 patients with limited-stage small cell lung cancer were randomised to receive once-daily (66 Gy in 33 fractions) or twice-daily (45 Gy in 30 fractions) radiotherapy. Radiotherapy (RT) was given concurrently with cisplatin and etoposide. G-CSF was given as primary or secondary prophylaxis or as a therapeutic measure during an episode of febrile neutropenia according to local protocols. Common terminology criteria for adverse events (CTCAE) v3.0 was used to record toxicity. Thirteen (34%) of 38 patients received G-CSF concurrently with RT. With a median follow-up of 16.9 months, there were no treatment related deaths reported. Seven (54%) patients experienced grade 3/4 thrombocytopenia and 5 (38%) experienced grade 3/4 anaemia. Thirty-one percent required platelet transfusions. No episodes of bleeding were observed. There were no cases of grade 3/4 acute pneumonitis. These data suggests that with modern three-dimensional (3D) conformal RT, G-CSF administration concurrently with CTRT does not result in the increase risk of pulmonary toxicity, but does increase the risk of thrombocytopenia. Whether the risks of thrombocytopenia are outweighed by the outcome of timely early concurrent CTRT is being evaluated prospectively in the ongoing phase III CONVERT trial (NCT00433563) in which G-CSF is permitted during thoracic irradiation.
-------------------------------------

10005561_234 - 0.863383377506 - medicine
[patient, pn, triazole, therapy, aspergillosis, chronic, long-term]

Peripheral neuropathy in patients on long-term triazole antifungal therapy.
OBJECTIVES: Triazole antifungal drugs are the mainstay of treatment for patients with chronic pulmonary aspergillosis and are often used as steroid-sparing agents in patients with allergic aspergillosis. Peripheral neuropathy (PN) is a rare but reported side effect of triazole therapy in the acute management of invasive fungal infections, but its incidence during long-term triazole treatment for chronic aspergillosis is unknown. The goal of this study was to determine the incidence of PN in this context. PATIENTS AND METHODS: A retrospective cohort study was carried out to collect data on all patients with chronic aspergillosis commenced on long-term triazole therapy at the National Aspergillosis Centre in Manchester between 2007 and 2010. RESULTS: Two hundred and twenty-two patients were commenced on triazole therapy. Ten percent developed PN after an average of 4 months. Seventeen percent of patients taking itraconazole, 9% taking voriconazole and 3% taking posaconazole developed PN. This is the first report of posaconazole-induced PN. Twenty-two episodes of PN presented as numbness or tingling in the extremities, while four episodes presented as predominant leg weakness. The majority of cases were axonal, length-dependent neuropathies that recovered after triazole medication was discontinued. Two patients had non-progressive but irreversible PN. Two patients were diagnosed with mononeuropathies. CONCLUSIONS: A 10% incidence of PN was observed for patients commenced on triazole therapy for chronic aspergillosis. Patients on long-term triazole therapy should be monitored for neurological symptoms. If PN is suspected, diagnosis should include nerve conduction studies, exclusion of other causes and consideration of dose reduction or cessation of therapy.
-------------------------------------

10011019_234 - 0.712878698471 - science
[behavior, bioreduction, sediment]

Bioreduction behavior of U(VI) sorbed to sediments
cited By (since 1996) 5
-------------------------------------

10005552_234 - 0.923806754503 - medicine
[patient, syndrome, oesophageal, bowel, motility, irritable, pressure]

Oesophageal motility in the irritable bowel syndrome.
Oesophageal motility was assessed in 30 patients with the irritable bowel syndrome and controls matched for age and sex. Lower oesophageal sphincter pressure was significantly lower in the patients than their controls (mean pressures 13.8 and 23.8 cm H2O respectively), and the same degree of difference between patients and controls was maintained in all age groups. In addition, spontaneous activity, repetitive contractions, and the presence of variable-amplitude and simultaneous waves were significantly more common in the patients, who were also more likely to have more than one abnormal pattern of motility. There was no difference in upper oesophageal sphincter pressure between the two groups. These findings may help to explain why patients with the irritable bowel syndrome may complain of upper gastrointestinal symptoms, including heartburn and dysphagia. The results suggest that the syndrome may be a more widespread disorder of smooth muscle, or its innervation, than was previously thought.
-------------------------------------

10008615_234 - 0.75528927521 - science
[chemical, potency, vehicle, skin, llna, datum, relative, influence, effect]

Vehicle effects on skin sensitizing potency of four chemicals: assessment using the local lymph node assay.
The murine local lymph node assay (LLNA) can be used to determine the relative skin sensitizing potency of chemicals via interpolation of the quantitative dose response data generated. Using this approach we have demonstrated previously that the vehicle matrix in which a chemical allergen is encountered on the skin can have a significant influence on sensitizing potency. Estimates of relative potency are calculated from LLNA dose responses as a function of the mathematically derived EC3 value, this being the concentration estimated to induce a stimulation index (SI) of 3. To investigate further the influence of application vehicle on sensitizing potency, the LLNA has been used to examine the activity of four recognized human contact allergens: isoeugenol and cinnamic aldehyde, two fragrance chemicals; 3-dimethylaminopropylamine (a sensitizing impurity of cocamidopropyl betaine, a surfactant used in shower gel) and dibromodicyanobutane (the sensitizing component of Euxyl K 400, a preservative used in cosmetics). The four chemicals were applied in each of seven different vehicles (acetone: olive oil 4 : 1; dimethylsulphoxide; methylethylketone; dimethyl formamide; propylene glycol; and both 50 : 50 and 90 : 10 mixtures of ethanol and water). It was found that the vehicle in which a chemical is presented to the epidermis can have a marked effect on sensitizing activity. EC3 values ranged from 0.9 to 4.9% for isoeugenol, from 0.5 to 1.7% for cinnamic aldehyde, from 1.7 to > 10% for dimethylaminopropylamine and from 0.4 to 6.4% for dibromodicyanobutane. These data confirm that the vehicle in which a chemical is encountered on the skin has an important influence on the relative skin sensitizing potency of chemicals and may have a significant impact on the acquisition of allergic contact dermatitis. The data also demonstrate the utility of the LLNA as a method for the prediction of these effects and thus for the development of more accurate risk assessments.
-------------------------------------

10003596_234 - 0.8459203252 - science
[gfi1, hematopoietic, endothelial, progenitor, endothelium, eht, gfi1b, cell, runx1, hemogenic]

GFI1 and GFI1B control the loss of endothelial identity of hemogenic endothelium during hematopoietic commitment.
Recent studies have established that during embryonic development, hematopoietic progenitors and stem cells are generated from hemogenic endothelium precursors through a process termed endothelial to hematopoietic transition (EHT). The transcription factor RUNX1 is essential for this process, but its main downstream effectors remain largely unknown. Here, we report the identification of Gfi1 and Gfi1b as direct targets of RUNX1 and critical regulators of EHT. GFI1 and GFI1B are able to trigger, in the absence of RUNX1, the down-regulation of endothelial markers and the formation of round cells, a morphologic change characteristic of EHT. Conversely, blood progenitors in Gfi1- and Gfi1b-deficient embryos maintain the expression of endothelial genes. Moreover, those cells are not released from the yolk sac and disseminated into embryonic tissues. Taken together, our findings demonstrate a critical and specific role of the GFI1 transcription factors in the first steps of the process leading to the generation of hematopoietic progenitors from hemogenic endothelium.
-------------------------------------

10003765_234 - 0.777097642672 - technology_and_computing
[delay, asynchronous, sdram, circuit, datum, digital, conference, ddr]

An Asynchronous Fully Digital Delay Locked Loop for DDR SDRAM Data Recovery
Browse Conference Publications > Asynchronous Circuits and Sys ...HelpAn Asynchronous Fully Digital Delay Locked Loop for DDR SDRAM Data RecoveryThis paper appears in:Asynchronous Circuits and Systems (ASYNC), 2012 18th IEEE International Symposium onDate of Conference: 7-9 May 2012Author(s): Garside, J.D.Furber, S.B. ; Temple, S. ; Clark, D.M. ; Plana, L.A.Page(s): 49 - 56Product Type: Conference Publications * Access Full Text in PDF * 6243881 searchabstract Download Citations * Email * Print * Rights And Permissions * Save to Project *AbstractDelay Locked Loops (DLLs) have become a standard structure in IC design, providing programmable, calibrated on-chip delays. They can be used, for example, to deskew clocks by matching delay paths. One application is in data recovery from DDR SDRAMs whose data strobe edges need retarding to provide adequate setup times for latching read data. The DLL described here was developed as a solution to this problem. It is wholly amenable to implementation on a purely digital CMOS device using standard cells. The authors' background in self-timed circuits led to a novel, compact design - particularly in regard of the phase detector - which can have adjustable hysteresis to avoid jitter. The unit achieves lock rapidly and can subsequently track environmental variations without pausing operation for recalibration. It has been fabricated in 130 nm CMOS and is in use in a SoC SDRAM interface.
-------------------------------------

10007483_234 - 0.921124558533 - medicine
[patient, intervention, preference, lung, cancer, symptom, attribute]

Applying Best-Worst scaling methodology to establish delivery preferences of a symptom supportive care intervention in patients with lung cancer.
BACKGROUND: Delivering a non-pharmacological symptom management intervention in patients with lung cancer is often challenging due to difficulties with recruitment, high attrition rates, high symptom burden, and other methodological problems. The aim of the present study was to elicit quantitative estimates of utility (benefit) associated with different attribute levels (delivery options) of a symptom management intervention in lung cancer patients. METHODS: An application of Best-Worst scaling methodology was used. Effects (attributes) tested included the location of the intervention (home or hospital), type of trainer (health professional or trained volunteer), caregiver involvement or not, and intervention delivered individually or in groups of patients. Participants were asked to evaluate and compare their preferences (utilities) towards the different attribute levels within scenarios and select the pair of attribute levels that they consider to be furthest apart. RESULTS: Eighty-seven patients with lung cancer participated. The most important preferences for an intervention included the location (being delivered at home) and delivered by a health care professional. The least important preference was the involvement of a caregiver. Gender had an effect on preferences, with females being less inclined than men to prefer to receive an intervention in the home than the hospital and less inclined than men to have no other patients present. Furthermore, older participants and those in advanced stages of their disease were less inclined to have no other patients present compared to younger participants and those with earlier stages of disease, respectively. CONCLUSION: Considering patient preferences is an important step in developing feasible, patient-centred, appropriate and methodologically rigorous interventions and this study provided indications of such patient preferences.
-------------------------------------

10008937_234 - 0.847469140493 - medicine
[corneal, nerve, cmt1a, patient, fiber]

Corneal confocal microscopy detects small-fiber neuropathy in Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease type 1A patients.
Introduction: Although unmyelinated nerve fibers are affected in Charcot-Marie-Tooth type 1A (CMT1A) disease, they have not been studied in detail due to the invasive nature of the techniques needed to study them. We established alterations in C-fiber bundles of the cornea in patients with CMT1A using non-invasive corneal confocal microscopy (CCM). Methods: Twelve patients with CMT1A and 12 healthy control subjects underwent assessment of neuropathic symptoms and deficits, electrophysiology, quantitative sensory testing, corneal sensitivity, and corneal confocal microscopy. Results: Corneal sensitivity, corneal nerve fiber density, corneal nerve branch density, corneal nerve fiber length, and corneal nerve fiber tortuosity were significantly reduced in CMT1A patients compared with controls. There was a significant correlation between corneal sensation and CCM parameters with the severity of painful neuropathic symptoms, cold and warm thresholds, and median nerve CMAP amplitude. Conclusions: CCM demonstrates significant damage to C-fiber bundles, which relates to some measures of neuropathy in CMT1A patients. Muscle Nerve, 2012.
-------------------------------------

10009738_234 - 0.966920677706 - medicine
[crswnp, mmp-8, il-8, patient, nasal]

In vivo relationship between collagenase-2 and interleukin-8 but not tumour necrosis factor-alpha in chronic rhinosinusitis with nasal polyposis.
BACKGROUND: The characteristic feature of chronic rhinosinusitis with nasal polyposis (CRSwNP) is eosinophilic inflammation of the sinus mucosa; a type of inflammation also seen in asthmatic airways. Similar histopathologic findings of airway remodelling are present in both diseases. Remodelling is tightly controlled by matrix metalloproteinases (MMP). Increase of collagenase-2 (MMP-8) expression in the bronchial epithelial cells has been described in asthmatic patients, but it has not been studied in CRSwNP. METHODS: The concentrations and degree of activation of MMP-8 were analysed by immunofluorometric assay and Western blotting, respectively, in sinus mucus samples from CRSwNP patients and in nasal lavages from healthy controls in relation to inductive cytokines interleukin-8 (IL-8) and tumour necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha). RESULTS: Significantly elevated levels of MMP-8 and IL-8 but not TNF-alpha were found in CRSwNP patients relative to controls. In particular, the activation of mesenchymal-type MMP-8 but not polymorphonuclear-type MMP-8 was associated with elevated IL-8 levels. CONCLUSIONS: The IL-8 and MMP-8 seemingly form an inductive cytokine-proteinase cascade in CRSwNP pathogenesis. Together they provide a target for novel therapies and a diagnostic tool for monitoring CRSwNP treatment.
-------------------------------------

10010331_234 - 0.935132661271 - science
[protein, vacuolar, membrane, vacuole]

The yeast vacuolar membrane proteome
Transport of solutes between the cytosol and the vacuolar lumen is of crucial importance for various functions of vacuoles, including ion homeostasis; detoxification; storage of different molecules such as amino acids, phosphate, and calcium ions; and proteolysis. To identify proteins that catalyze solute transport across the vacuolar membrane, the membrane proteome of purified Saccharomyces cerevisiae vacuoles was analyzed. Subtractive proteomics was used to distinguish contaminants from true vacuolar proteins by comparing the relative abundances of proteins in pure and crude preparations. A robust statistical analysis combining enrichment ranking with the double boundary iterative group analysis revealed that 148 proteins were significantly enriched in the pure vacuolar preparations. Among these proteins were well characterized vacuolar proteins, such as the subunits of the vacuolar H+-ATPase, but also proteins that had not previously been assigned to a cellular location, many of which are likely novel vacuolar membrane transporters, e.g. for nucleosides and oligopeptides. Although the majority of contaminating proteins from other organelles were depleted from the pure vacuolar membranes, some proteins annotated to reside in other cellular locations were enriched along with the vacuolar proteins. In many cases the enrichment of these proteins is biologically relevant, and we discuss that a large group is involved in membrane fusion and protein trafficking to vacuoles and may have multiple localizations. Other proteins are degraded in vacuoles, and in some cases database annotations are likely to be incomplete or incorrect. Our work provides a wealth of information on vacuolar biology and a solid basis for further characterization of vacuolar functions. ?? 2009 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.
-------------------------------------

10009166_234 - 0.875537441098 - finance
[firm, financial, entry, exit, model, shock, rate, output]

Firm Entry and Exit with Financial Frictions
This paper considers a model of firm dynamics to study the quantitative importance of financial frictions for the entry and exit of firms over the business cycle.  Firms face a working capital constraint in that they must pay wages and choose labor in advance.  The firm finances wages with a defaultable one-period non-contingent bond.  Financial frictions then introduce an external finance premium into the firm's cost of borrowing, which constrains the firm's demand for labor and influences the firm's entry and exit decisions through its effect on future profits.  I then measure a financial shock, which contributes to the external finance premium, from corporate bond spreads and feed it back into the model.  Under reasonable parameters, the model predicts that entry and exit rates are almost twice as sensitive to financial shocks than output and employment.  Moreover, historical financial shocks account for a third of cyclical movements in output and hours in the United States between 1953 and 2010.  They are an even stronger explanation for the first year of the Great Recession, accounting for more than half of the initial decline in output and hours, a third of the decline in entry rates and a fifth of the increase in exit rates.
-------------------------------------

10018289_234 - 0.849973279147 - science
[chemokine, immunopathology, rsv, expression, mouse, infection, th2, cell, production]

Differential chemokine expression following respiratory virus infection reflects Th1- or Th2-biased immunopathology.
Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) is a major viral pathogen of infants that also reinfects adults. During RSV infection, inflammatory host cell recruitment to the lung plays a central role in determining disease outcome. Chemokines mediate cell recruitment to sites of inflammation and are influenced by, and influence, the production of cytokines. We therefore compared chemokine production in a mouse model of immunopathogenic RSV infection in which either Th1 or Th2 immunopathology is induced by prior sensitization to individual RSV proteins. Chemokine expression profiles were profoundly affected by the nature of the pulmonary immunopathology: "Th2" immunopathology in BALB/c mice was associated with increased and prolonged expression of CCL2 (MCP-1), CXCL10 (IP-10), and CCL11 (eotaxin) starting within 24 h of challenge. C57BL/6 mice with "Th2" pathology (enabled by a deficiency of CD8+ cells) also showed increased CCL2 production. No differences in chemokine receptor expression were detected. Chemokine blockers may therefore be of use for children with bronchiolitis.
-------------------------------------

10004728_234 - 0.940775401177 - science
[fluid, shear, phpa, viscosity, polymer]

Observations on viscosity reduction of PHPA polymer support fluids
Polymer fluids have been used in foundation drilling for many years and yet no previous studies have been reported which assess their sensitivity to shear such as is induced by pumping equipment. A field study has been carried out on two specific polymer products under actual site conditions. It is found that there is a significant loss of viscosity when partially hydrolyzed polyacrylamide (PHPA) fluids are circulated through a centrifugal pump in a loop system. This behavior is quite distinct from that of bentonite slurries which require high shear mixing and recirculation to ensure good hydration. At first sight the sensitivity of PHPA fluids to shear may be perceived as a disadvantage but in fact if shear can be reduced so can on-site energy consumption. A reduction in fluid viscosity was also observed over a standing period between mixing and use, suggesting that a second mechanism may be contributing to the properties change. From the trial results, recommendations are given on pump selection and on the maintenance of fluid properties.
-------------------------------------

10010405_234 - 0.913229695086 - medicine
[lymphoma, patient, biomarker, chemotherapy, ndna, toxicity, potential, response, treatment, utility]

Assessment of circulating biomarkers for potential pharmacodynamic utility in patients with lymphoma
PURPOSE:

Treatment efficacy and toxicity are difficult to predict in lymphoma patients. In this study, the utility of circulating biomarkers in predicting and/or monitoring treatment efficacy/toxicity were investigated.
PATIENTS AND METHODS:

Circulating biomarkers of cell death (nucleosomal DNA (nDNA) and cytokeratin 18 (CK18)), and circulating FLT3 ligand, a potential biomarker of myelosuppression, were assessed before and serially after standard chemotherapy in 49 patients with Hodgkin and non-Hodgkin lymphoma. Cytokeratin 18 is not expressed in lymphoma cells so is a potential biomarker of epithelial toxicity in this setting. Tumour response was assessed before and after completion of chemotherapy by 2D and 3D computed tomography radiological response.
RESULTS:

Baseline nDNA level was significantly higher in all lymphoma subtypes compared with 61 healthy controls and was prognostic for progression-free survival in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL). Decreases in nDNA levels were observed in the first week after chemotherapy; in FL, early falls in nDNA predicted for long remission following therapy. In DLBCL, elevations in nDNA occurred in cases with progressive disease. Circulating CK18 increased within 48 h of chemotherapy and was significantly higher in patients experiencing epithelial toxicity graded >3 by Common Terminology for Classification of Adverse Events criteria. FLT3 ligand was elevated within 3-8 days of chemotherapy initiation and predicted those patients who subsequently developed neutropenic sepsis.
CONCLUSION:

These data suggest circulating biomarkers contribute useful information regarding tumour response and toxicity in patients receiving standard chemotherapy and have potential utility in the development of individualised treatment approaches in lymphoma. These biomarkers are now being tested within multicentre phase III trials to progress their qualification.
-------------------------------------

10017103_234 - 0.821699353004 - medicine
[ustekinumab, pasi, psoriasis, patient, treatment]

Practical experience of ustekinumab in the treatment of psoriasis: experience from a multicentre, retrospective case cohort study across the U.K. and Ireland.
BACKGROUND: There are limited data on the use of ustekinumab outside of clinical trials. OBJECTIVES: To assess the efficacy and safety of ustekinumab in patients with severe psoriasis attending 10 dermatology centres in the U.K. and Ireland. METHODS: A retrospective case-note review of 129 patients with psoriasis treated with ustekinumab. RESULTS: Baseline Psoriasis Area and Severity Index (PASI) was 22·9±10·1 (mean±SD). After 16weeks of treatment with ustekinumab PASI 75 (75% reduction in PASI) was observed in 63·0% (n=80/127) of patients, although four patients required concomitant therapy at the 16-week time point. Previous biologic use did show a small, non-significant trend towards treatment failure. A PASI 75 response was seen in 29·4% (n=5/17) of individuals weighing 90-100kg and treated with the standard 45mg ustekinumab dose compared with PASI 75 of 70·3%, 71·4%, 75·0% and 55·6% for weight groups <80, 80-90, 100-110 and >110kg, respectively (P=0·024). Ustekinumab therapy was well tolerated; serious adverse events were observed in 2·3% (n=3/129) of patients. CONCLUSIONS: Ustekinumab is a novel biologic agent for psoriasis. When used in everyday clinical practice it demonstrates high levels of short-term therapeutic efficacy with an acceptable short-term safety profile.
-------------------------------------

10005311_234 - 0.908246917548 - science
[gene, keloid, margin, kd, biopsy, skin, culture, expression, study, biomarker]

Identification of novel keloid biomarkers through Profiling of Tissue Biopsies versus Cell Cultures in Keloid Margin specimens Compared to adjacent Normal Skin.
Objective: Keloid disease (KD) is a benign fibroproliferative skin tumor that results from abnormal wound healing and has no single definitive treatment. This study aims to identify KD biomarkers, which are cellular mediators that can serve as indicators of normal, pathological, and therapeutic processes. Methods: Bioinformatics analytic approaches, including comprehensive literature searches and DAVID Bioinformatics Resources 2008, were performed on the established KD linkage and previously reported microarray data to identify potential candidate genes for the study. Keloid margins and unaffected skin were obtained from KD patients (n = 4). RNA was extracted from the biopsies and second-passage culture equivalents. Reverse-transcriptase quantitative polymerase chain reactions were used to determine the gene expression levels. Student t tests were used to analyze the statistical significance in differential gene expressions. Results: Nineteen candidate genes were initially selected by bioinformatics analysis. Of the 19 genes, 10 were significantly (P < .05) upregulated in keloid margin biopsy specimens. The top-5 fold changes range from 10-fold to 175-fold, including aggrecan; asporin; inhibin, beta A; tumor necrosis factor-alpha inducible protein 6; and chromosome 5 open reading frame 13. There was no significant differential gene expression between the fibroblasts established using keloid margin or internal control sites. Conclusions: The transcriptomic data generated from cultures did not consistently correlate to the biopsy equivalents. This study has demonstrated 10 genes that are significantly upregulated in biopsy samples of keloid margin, 5 of which have a fold change higher than 10-fold. Importantly these genes may serve as a potential biomarker for KD.
-------------------------------------

10003087_234 - 0.827713062706 - science
[cartilage, bml, change, within-grade, aor, ci, grade, assessment, damage, worsening]

Predictive validity of within-grade scoring of longitudinal changes of MRI-based cartilage morphology and bone marrow lesion assessment in the tibio-femoral joint - the MOST study.
OBJECTIVE: In order to increase sensitivity to detect longitudinal change, recording of within-grade changes was introduced for cartilage morphology and bone marrow lesion (BML) assessment in semiquantitative magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scoring of knee osteoarthritis (OA). The aim of this study was to examine the validity provided by within-grade scoring. DESIGN: The Multicenter Osteoarthritis (MOST) study is a longitudinal study of subjects with or at risk of knee OA. Baseline and 30 months MRIs were read according to the modified Whole-Organ Magnetic Resonance Imaging Score (WORMS) system including within-grade changes for cartilage and BMLs. We tested the validity of within-grade changes by whether the 30-month changes in cartilage and BML assessment were predicted by baseline ipsi-compartmental meniscal damage and malalignment, factors known to affect cartilage loss and BMLs, using ordinal logistic regression. RESULTS: 1867 Knees (from 1411 participants) were included. Severe medial meniscal damage predicted partial grade (adjusted odds ratio (aOR) 4.4, 95% confidence interval (95% CI) 2.2, 8.7) but not ≥full grade (aOR 1.3, 95% CI 0.8, 2.2) worsening of cartilage loss and predicted both, partial grade (aOR 9.6, 95% CI 3.6, 25.1) and ≥full grade (aOR 5.1, 95% CI 3.2, 8.2) worsening of BMLs. Severe, but not moderate, malalignment predicted ipsi-compartmental within-grade (medial cartilage damage: aOR 5.5, 95% CI 2.6, 11.6; medial worsening of BMLs: aOR 4.9, 95% CI 2.0, 12.3) but not full grade worsening of BMLs and cartilage damage. CONCLUSIONS: Within-grade changes in semiquantitative MRI assessment of cartilage and BMLs are valid and their use may increase the sensitivity of semiquantitative readings in detecting longitudinal changes in these structures.
-------------------------------------

10003524_234 - 0.879691393987 - science
[arsenic, sediment, bengal, release]

Role of metal-reducing bacteria in arsenic release from Bengal delta sediments.
The contamination of ground waters, abstracted for drinking and irrigation, by sediment-derived arsenic threatens the health of tens of millions of people worldwide, most notably in Bangladesh and West Bengal. Despite the calamitous effects on human health arising from the extensive use of arsenic-enriched groundwaters in these regions, the mechanisms of arsenic release from sediments remain poorly characterized and are topics of intense international debate. We use a microscosm-based approach to investigate these mechanisms: techniques of microbiol. and mol. ecol. are used in combination with aq. and solid phase speciation anal. of arsenic. Here we show that anaerobic metal-reducing bacteria can play a key role in the mobilization of arsenic in sediments collected from a contaminated aquifer in West Bengal. We also show that, for the sediments in this study, arsenic release took place after Fe(III) redn., rather than occurring simultaneously. Identification of the crit. factors controlling the biogeoche
-------------------------------------

10008946_234 - 0.905353328288 - science
[cell, surface, immobilization, response, film, pcl, rgd, adhesion, schwann]

Immobilization of cell-binding peptides on poly-ε-caprolactone film surface to biomimic the peripheral nervous system.
AbstractCell-material interactions are crucial for cell adhesion and proliferation on biomaterial surfaces. Immobilization of biomolecules leads to the formation of biomimetic substrates, improving cell response. We introduced RGD (Arg-Gly-Asp) sequences on poly-ε-caprolactone (PCL) film surfaces using thiol chemistry to enhance Schwann cell (SC) response. XPS elemental analysis indicated an estimate of 2-3% peptide functionalization on the PCL surface, comparable with carbodiimide chemistry. Contact angle was not remarkably reduced; hence, cell response was only affected by chemical cues on the film surface. Adhesion and proliferation of Schwann cells were enhanced after PCL modification. Particularly, RGD immobilization increased cell attachment up to 40% after 6 h of culture. It was demonstrated that SC morphology changed from round to very elongated shape when surface modification was carried out, with an increase in the length of cellular processes up to 50% after 5 days of culture. Finally RGD immobilization triggered the formation of focal adhesion related to higher cell spreading. In summary, this study provides a method for immobilization of biomolecules on PCL films to be used in peripheral nerve repair, as demonstrated by the enhanced response of Schwann cells.
-------------------------------------

10009389_234 - 0.803529026153 - science
[computation, chemical, s20111]

Biologically Inspired Computation for Chemical Sensing
S20111
-------------------------------------

10011713_234 - 0.897959355862 - science
[tm, immunoreactivity, placenta, endothelium, subunit, syncytin]

Syncytin 1 in the human placenta.
This study characterises HERV-W (syncytin 1) expression in normal and pathologic placenta and in BeWo cells. HERV-W mRNA levels were higher in the first trimester than at term, and similar patterns were observed with another retrovirally-derived mRNA species, ERV-3. N-glycosylated syncytin 1 precursor (73 kDa) is cleaved to surface-associated (SU) and transmembrane (TM) subunits. Both were evident in villous trophoblast, where perinuclear and punctate cytoplasmic deposits were observed, and linear TM subunit immunoreactivity was seen at the syncytial microvillous membrane. Punctate immunoreactivity was seen in BeWo cells with antibodies to SU and TM, and the two were co-localised. SU immunoreactivity was observed in association with fetal endothelium, and this effect was increased in tissue from pre-eclamptic placentas, which also showed a higher level of total SU protein. Absence of the TM subunit from endothelium suggests it is not a biosynthetic source. We suggest that SU is released from trophoblast into fetal circulation where it may bind vascular endothelium.
-------------------------------------

10005070_234 - 0.720951918012 - education
[university, education, conceptualisation, quality, table, league, higher]

Rank and File: managing individual performance in university research
League tables are a common way for various competitive sports to judge team quality and identify winners and are also making increasingly frequent appearances in higher education globally. In this paper, we argue that this compilation of league tables is a product of the global hegemony of market-driven systems of higher education in which universities compete with each other for declining resources and students-as-customers. We explore why and how such exercises shape and define conceptualisations of the relative strength of organisations, and what the consequences of this are likely to be. Our analysis is grounded in a conceptualisation of universities, particularly in the UK, as marketised, neo-liberal institutions for which rankings are essential to organisational transformation. We provide empirical data to support our argument via an exploration of the UK Association of Business Schools' Academic Journal Quality Guide.
-------------------------------------

10018332_234 - 0.708009420495 - science
[cell, lung, ox40, immune]

A critical role for OX40 in T cell-mediated immunopathology during lung viral infection.
Respiratory infections are the third leading cause of death worldwide. Illness is caused by pathogen replication and disruption of airway homeostasis by excessive expansion of cell numbers. One strategy to prevent lung immune-mediated damage involves reducing the cellular burden. To date, antiinflammatory strategies have affected both antigen-specific and naive immune repertoires. Here we report a novel form of immune intervention that specifically targets recently activated T cells alone. OX40 (CD134) is absent on naive T cells but up-regulated 1-2 d after antigen activation. OX40-immunoglobulin fusion proteins block the interaction of OX40 with its ligand on antigen-presenting cells and eliminate weight loss and cachexia without preventing virus clearance. Reduced proliferation and enhanced apoptosis of lung cells accompanied the improved clinical phenotype. Manipulation of this late costimulatory pathway has clear therapeutic potential for the treatment of dysregulated lung immune responses.
-------------------------------------

10009682_234 - 0.811288970272 - science
[erk5, kinase, protein, response, neuron, survival, factor, extracellular]

Regulation of neuronal survival by the extracellular signal-regulated protein kinase 5.
The extracellular signal-regulated protein kinase 5 (ERK5) is a mitogen-activated protein kinase that phosphorylates and regulates various transcription factors in response to growth factors and extracellular stresses. To address its biological function during the development of the peripheral nervous system (PNS), we have engineered a novel model of sympathetic neurons in which the erk5 gene can be deleted in vitro. Our data provide for the first time genetic evidence that ERK5 is required to mediate the survival response of neurons to nerve growth factor. Increased cell death associated with the loss of ERK5 is caused by elevated expression of the BH3-only members of the Bcl-2 family, Bad and Bim. Further investigation indicated that ERK5 suppresses the transcription of the bad and the bim genes by Ca(2+)/cAMP response element-binding protein and Forkhead box O3a, respectively. Consistently, we found that the phosphorylation of both p90 ribosomal S6 kinase and protein kinase B is impaired in neurons lacking ERK5. Together these findings reveal a novel signaling mechanism that promotes neuronal survival during the development of the PNS.
-------------------------------------

10010322_234 - 0.967249780523 - science
[biology, synthetic]

A turning point for natural product discovery-ESF-EMBO research conference: synthetic biology of antibiotic production.
Synthetic Biology is in a critical phase of its development: it has finally reached the point where it can move from proof-of-principle studies to real-world applications. Secondary metabolite biosynthesis, especially the discovery and production of antibiotics, is a particularly relevant target area for such applications of synthetic biology. The first international conference to explore this subject was held in Spain in October 2011. In four sessions on General Synthetic Biology, Filamentous Fungal Systems, Actinomyces Systems, and Tools and Host Structures, scientists presented the most recent technological and scientific advances, and a final-day Forward Look Plenary Discussion identified future trends in the field. ?? 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
-------------------------------------

10007003_234 - 0.836449545128 - food_and_drink
[food, allergy, effective, safe, treatment, fish, peach, immunotherapy]

FAST: Towards safe and effective subcutaneous immunotherapy of persistent life-threatening food allergies.
ABSTRACT: The FAST project (Food Allergy Specific Immunotherapy) aims at the development of safe and effective treatment of food allergies, targeting prevalent, persistent and severe allergy to fish and peach. Classical allergen-specific immunotherapy (SIT), using subcutaneous injections with aqueous food extracts may be effective but has proven to be accompanied by too many anaphylactic side-effects. FAST aims to develop a safe alternative by replacing food extracts with hypoallergenic recombinant major allergens as the active ingredients of SIT. Both severe fish and peach allergy are caused by a single major allergen, parvalbumin (Cyp c 1) and lipid transfer protein (Pru p 3), respectively. Two approaches are being evaluated for achieving hypoallergenicity, i.e. site-directed mutagenesis and chemical modification. The most promising hypoallergens will be produced under GMP conditions. After pre-clinical testing (toxicology testing and efficacy in mouse models), SCIT with alum-absorbed hypoallergens will be evaluated in phase I/IIa and IIb randomized double-blind placebo-controlled (DBPC) clinical trials, with the DBPC food challenge as primary read-out. To understand the underlying immune mechanisms in depth serological and cellular immune analyses will be performed, allowing identification of novel biomarkers for monitoring treatment efficacy. FAST aims at improving the quality of life of food allergic patients by providing a safe and effective treatment that will significantly lower their threshold for fish or peach intake, thereby decreasing their anxiety and dependence on rescue medication.
-------------------------------------

10018296_234 - 0.700267280107 - science
[lung, immune, inflammatory]

Manipulation of acute inflammatory lung disease.
Inflammatory lung disease to innocuous antigens or infectious pathogens is a common occurrence and in some cases, life threatening. Often, the inflammatory infiltrate that accompanies these events contributes to pathology by deleterious effects on otherwise healthy tissue and by compromising lung function by consolidating (blocking) the airspaces. A fine balance, therefore, exists between a lung immune response and immune-mediated damage, and in some the "threshold of ignorance" may be set too low. In most cases, the contributing, potentially offending, cell population or immune pathway is known, as are factors that regulate them. Why then are targeted therapeutic strategies to manipulate them not more commonplace in clinical medicine? This review highlights immune homeostasis in the lung, how and why this is lost during acute lung infection, and strategies showing promise as future immune therapeutics.
-------------------------------------

10008097_234 - 0.78051815414 - science
[diffusivity, hd, tmt, parietal, test, upsit, fractional, anisotropy, disease, correlation]

The structural correlates of functional deficits in early huntington's disease.
Neuropathological studies in Huntington disease (HD) have demonstrated neuronal loss in the striatum, as well as in other brain regions including the cortex. With diffusion tensor MRI we evaluated the hypothesis that the clinical dysfunction in HD is related to regionally specific lesions of circuit-specific cortico-basal ganglia networks rather than to the striatum only. We included 27 HD and 24 controls from the TRACK-HD Paris cohort. The following assessments were used: self-paced tapping tasks, trail B making test (TMT), University of Pennsylvania smell identification test (UPSIT), and apathy scores from the problem behaviors assessment. Group comparisons of fractional anisotropy and mean diffusivity and correlations were performed using voxel-based analysis. In the cortex, HD patients showed significant correlations between: (i) self paced tapping and mean diffusivity in the parietal lobe at 1.8 Hz and prefrontal areas at 3 Hz, (ii) UPSIT and mean diffusivity in the parietal, and median temporal lobes, the cingulum and the insula, and fractional anisotropy in the insula and the external capsule, (iii) TMT B and mean diffusivity in the white matter of the superior frontal, orbital, temporal, superior parietal and post central areas, and (iv) apathy and fractional anisotropy in the white matter of the rectus gyrus. In the basal ganglia, we found correlations between the self paced tapping, UPSIT, TMT tests, and mean diffusivity in the anterior part of the putamen and the caudate nucleus. In conclusion, disruption of motor, associative and limbic cortico-striatal circuits differentially contribute to the clinical signs of the disease. Hum Brain Mapp, 2012. © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
-------------------------------------

10008372_234 - 0.784884951113 - science
[cell, epithelial, mammary, 1-integrin, proliferation, migration]

Specific β-containing Integrins Exert Differential Control on Proliferation and Two-dimensional Collective Cell Migration in Mammary Epithelial Cells
Understanding how cell cycle is regulated in normal mammary epithelia is essential for deciphering defects of breast cancer and therefore for developing new therapies. Signals provided by both the extracellular matrix and growth factors are essential for epithelial cell proliferation. However, the mechanisms by which adhesion controls cell cycle in normal epithelia are poorly established. In this study, we describe the consequences of removing the β1-integrin gene from primary cultures of mammary epithelial cells in situ, using CreER. Upon β1-integrin gene deletion, the cells were unable to progress efficiently through S-phase, but were still able to undergo collective two-dimensional migration. These responses are explained by the presence of β3-integrin in β1-integrin-null cells, indicating that integrins containing different β-subunits exert differential control on mammary epithelial proliferation and migration. β1-Integrin deletion did not inhibit growth factor signaling to Erk or prevent the recruitment of core adhesome components to focal adhesions. Instead the S-phase arrest resulted from defective Rac activation and Erk translocation to the nucleus. Rac inhibition prevented Erk translocation and blocked proliferation. Activated Rac1 rescued the proliferation defect in β1-integrin-depleted cells, indicating that this GTPase is essential in propagating proliferative β1-integrin signals. These results show that β1-integrins promote cell cycle in mammary epithelial cells, whereas β3-integrins are involved in migration.
-------------------------------------

10004737_234 - 0.765728744876 - technology_and_computing
[model, condor-copasi, computing, simulation, high-throughput, analysis, condor, environment, task, number]

Condor-COPASI: high-throughput computing for biochemical networks.
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Mathematical modelling has become a standard technique to improve our understanding of complex biological systems. As models become larger and more complex, simulations and analyses require increasing amounts of computational power. Clusters of computers in a high-throughput computing environment can help to provide the resources required for computationally expensive model analysis. However, exploiting such a system can be difficult for users without the necessary expertise. RESULTS: We present Condor-COPASI, a server-based software tool that integrates COPASI, a biological pathway simulation tool, with Condor, a high-throughput computing environment. Condor-COPASI provides a web-based interface, which makes it extremely easy for a user to run a number of model simulation and analysis tasks in parallel. Tasks are transparently split into smaller parts, and and submitted for execution on a Condor pool. Result output is presented to the user in a number of formats, including tables and interactive graphical displays. CONCLUSIONS: Condor-COPASI can effectively use a Condor high-throughput computing environment to provide significant gains in performance for a number of model simulation and analysis tasks. Condor-COPASI is free, open source software, released under the Artistic License 2.0, and is suitable for use by any institution with access to a Condor pool. Source code is freely available for download at http://code.google.com/p/condor-copasi/, along with full instructions on deployment and usage.
-------------------------------------

10016401_234 - 0.741618323214 - science
[potential, ??, oceanic, ikaite, evolution]

Potential of ikaite to record the evolution of oceanic ??18O
cited By (since 1996) 5
-------------------------------------

10003758_234 - 0.775265714461 - technology_and_computing
[simulation, cortical, spinnaker, computer]

Power-efficient simulation of detailed cortical microcircuits on SpiNNaker
Computer simulation of neural matter is a promising methodology for understanding the function of the brain. Recent anatomical studies have mapped the intricate structure of cortex, and these data have been exploited in numerous simulations attempting to explain its function. However, the largest of these models run inconveniently slowly and require vast amounts of electrical power, which hinders useful experimentation. SpiNNaker is a novel computer architecture designed to address these problems using low-power microprocessors and custom communication hardware. We use four SpiNNaker chips (of a planned fifty thousand) to simulate, in real-time, a cortical circuit of ten thousand spiking neurons and four million synapses. In this simulation, the hardware consumes 100 nJ per neuron per millisecond and 43 nJ per postsynaptic potential, which is the smallest quantity reported for any digital computer. We argue that this approaches fast, power-feasible and scientifically useful simulations of large cortical areas.
-------------------------------------

10004091_234 - 0.9149373791 - science
[alga, process, lipid, glucose, carbohydrate, bioconversion]

A novel process for enhancing oil production in algae biorefineries through bioconversion of solid by-products
This paper focuses on a novel process for adding value to algae residue. In current processes oleaginous microalgae are grown and harvested for lipid production leaving a lipid-free algae residue. The process described here includes conversion of the carbohydrate fraction into glucose prior to lipid extraction. This can be fermented to produce up to 15\% additional lipids using another oleaginous microorganism. It was found that in situ enzymes can hydrolyze storage carbohydrates in the algae into glucose and that a temperature of 55 degrees C for about 20 h gave the best glucose yield. Up to 75\% of available carbohydrates were converted to a generic fermentation feedstock containing 73 g/L glucose. The bioconversion step was found to increase the free water content by 60\% and it was found that when the bioconversion was carried out prior to the extraction step, it improved the solvent extractability of lipids from the algae. (C) 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
-------------------------------------

10005545_234 - 0.831709543559 - medicine
[disease, patient]

Diagnosis of Crohn's disease.
A study has been made of diagnostic errors and delays in 140 patients with Crohn's disease. Results were correlated with the site of the disease. Only 13% of patients with small-bowel disease and 21% of the group as a whole were correctly diagnosed after initial investigation. A large number of misdiagnoses were made, and these were often multiple. Of patients with small-bowel disease, 19% were first thought to be suffering from a psychiatric disorder.
-------------------------------------

10008863_234 - 0.803220568248 - science
[ige, protein, response, lactoferrin, igg, novel, form, glycosylation, recombinant, molecule]

Influence of protein expression system on elicitation of IgE antibody responses: experience with lactoferrin.
With increased interest in genetically modified (GM) crop plants there is an important need to understand the properties that contribute to the ability of such novel proteins to provoke immune and/or allergic responses. One characteristic that may be relevant is glycosylation, particularly as novel expression systems (e.g. bacterial to plant) will impact on the protein glycoprofile. The allergenicity (IgE inducing) and immunogenicity (IgG inducing) properties of wild type native human lactoferrin (NLF) from human milk (hm) and neutrophil granules (n) and a recombinant molecule produced in rice (RLF) have been assessed. These forms of lactoferrin have identical amino acid sequences, but different glycosylation patterns: hmNLF and nNLF have complex glycoprofiles including Lewis (Le)(x) structures, with particularly high levels of Le(x) expressed by nNLF, whereas RLF is simpler and rich in mannose residues. Antibody responses induced in BALB/c strain mice by intraperitoneal exposure to the different forms of lactoferrin were characterised. Immunisation with both forms of NLF stimulated substantial IgG and IgE antibody responses. In contrast, the recombinant molecule was considerably less immunogenic and failed to stimulate detectable IgE, irrespective of endotoxin and iron content. The glycans did not contribute to epitope formation, with equivalent IgE and IgG binding recorded for high titre anti-NLF antisera regardless of whether the immunising NLF or the recombinant molecule were used substrates in the analyses. These data demonstrate that differential glycosylation profiles can have a profound impact on protein allergenicity and immunogenicity, with mannose and Le(x) exhibiting opposing effects. These results have clear relevance for characterising the allergenic hazards of novel proteins in GM crops.
-------------------------------------

10003668_234 - 0.92795943329 - medicine
[depression, carer, nurse, patient, sign, scale, stroke]

The use of nurses' and carers' observations in the identification of poststroke depression.
AIM: This paper is a report of a study to determine the accuracy and utility of an observational screening tool (Signs of Depression Scale), when rated by nurses and carers for detecting depression in patients who have recently had a stroke. BACKGROUND: Depression following a stroke is common and adversely affects recovery and rehabilitation. Identifying depression when patients have communication and cognitive difficulties is especially problematic. Screening tools which rely solely on observation may be beneficial in this group. METHOD: A cross-sectional study of people admitted with an acute stroke compared a clinical diagnosis of depression by a psychiatrist (the gold standard) with the Signs of Depression Scale completed by nurses and carers. The agreement between nurses' and carers' ratings was also explored. Data were collected over 10 months (December 2004-October 2005). FINDINGS: Seventy-one patients were included in the study, median age 70 inter-quartile ranges (IQR) 59-76, including 40 (56.3%) males. The psychiatrist classified 25/71 (35.2%) patients as depressed. Using the recommended cut-point of 2 or more on the Signs of Depression Scale, the nurse and carer respectively rated 27/71 (38.0%) and 18/30 (60.0%) patients as potentially depressed. The proportion of patients correctly identified as depressed by the test (sensitivity) when rated by nurses was 64%, and the proportion of patients not depressed who were correctly identified by the test (specificity) was 61%, whereas carers achieved sensitivity 90% and specificity 35%. The optimal cut-point for carers was higher at 4 or more. Inter-rater agreement on the Signs of Depression Scale between nurses and carers was fair (ICC = 0.43, 95% CI: 0.09-0.68). CONCLUSION: The Signs of Depression Scale is easily completed by clinical staff, although we found the sensitivity when completed by nurses to be low. Information from carers shows potential to improve screening and it is important for nurses to value the knowledge and skills of carers in detecting depression following a stroke. Further refinement of the Signs of Depression Scale, with accompanying research, is required.
-------------------------------------

10008624_234 - 0.892500371491 - science
[lymph, node, skin, function, method, contact, sensitization]

Local lymph node assays.
The murine local lymph node assay (LLNA) allows identification of chemicals that have the potential to cause skin sensitization and allergic contact dermatitis. In this test, contact allergens are identified as a function of events occurring during the induction phase of skin sensitization; specifically, stimulation of proliferative responses in draining lymph nodes measured as a function of radiolabeled thymidine incorporation in situ. Two methods are presented. In one, lymph nodes are pooled on an experimental group basis, while in the other, lymph nodes of individual animal are pooled, which enables statistical analyses. These methods have been developed for contact sensitization hazard assessment and provide a robust and reliable method as an alternative to guinea pig tests which measure skin sensitizing potential as a function of challenge-induced skin reactions in previously sensitized animals. It is also possible to use LLNA data for measurement of relative potency in terms of risk assessment.
-------------------------------------

10018548_234 - 0.927199601674 - science
[stress, intergranular, in-plane, anisotropy, zirconium, texture]

Effects of texture and anisotropy on intergranular stress development in zirconium
The influence of texture and anisotropy on the generation of intergranular stresses in clock-rolled zirconium is investigated using neutron diffraction and elastoplastic self-consistent modelling. Comparison between experimental data and model calculations indicates that the operation mainly of prismatic and basal slip explains the trends in intergranular stress evolution during in-plane tensile and through-thickness compressive deformation, whilst twinning plays a significant role during in-plane compression.
-------------------------------------

10002322_234 - 0.821263232046 - science
[protein]

Protein Motions Are Coupled to the Reaction Chemistry in Coenzyme B(12) -Dependent Ethanolamine Ammonia Lyase.
The role of protein dynamics in promoting catalysis is hotly debated. Infrared data from both ultrafast flash photolysis and stopped-flow studies show that not only does there appear to be vibrational coupling between the cofactor and protein in B(12) -dependent ethanolamine ammonia lyase, but also that there are significant protein motions coupled to the reaction that follows substrate binding.
-------------------------------------

10007411_234 - 0.743384215894 - technology_and_computing
[system, pulsar, distance, millisecond, parallax, mass]

A PARALLAX DISTANCE AND MASS ESTIMATE FOR THE TRANSITIONAL MILLISECOND PULSAR SYSTEM J1023+0038
The recently discovered transitional millisecond pulsar system J1023+0038 exposes a crucial evolutionary phase of recycled neutron stars for multiwavelength study. The system, comprising the neutron star itself, its stellar companion, and the surrounding medium, is visible across the electromagnetic spectrum from the radio to X-ray/gamma-ray regimes and offers insight into the recycling phase of millisecond pulsar evolution. Here, we report on multiple-epoch astrometric observations with the Very Long Baseline Array (VLBA) which give a system parallax of 0.731 ?? 0.022 milliarcseconds (mas) and a proper motion of 17.98 ?? 0.05 mas yr-1. By combining our results with previous optical observations, we are able to use the parallax distance of 1368+42 - 39 pc to estimate the mass of the pulsar to be 1.71 ?? 0.16 M sun, and we are also able to measure the three-dimensional space velocity of the system to be 126 ?? 5 km s-1. Despite the precise nature of the VLBA measurements, the remaining \ {}3\% distance uncertainty dominates the 0.16 M sun error on our mass estimate.
-------------------------------------

10003589_234 - 0.740166601122 - science
[free-free, derivation, ``, galactic, plane, emission]

A derivation of the free-free emission on the Galactic plane between â„“= 20Â° and 44Â°
DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2966.2012.20796.x; eprintid: arXiv:1108.6268
-------------------------------------

10018386_234 - 0.785410728753 - medicine
[infection, bcg, lung, eosinophilia, response, cryptococcus]

Prior exposure to live Mycobacterium bovis BCG decreases Cryptococcus neoformans-induced lung eosinophilia in a gamma interferon-dependent manner.
Some common childhood infections appear to prevent the development of atopy and asthma. In some Mycobacterium bovis BCG-vaccinated populations, strong delayed-type hypersensitivity responses to mycobacterial antigens are associated with a reduced risk of atopy. Although BCG exposure decreases allergen-induced lung eosinophilia in animal models, little attention has been given to the effect of immunity to BCG on responses against live pathogens. We used the murine Cryptococcus neoformans infection model to investigate whether prior BCG infection can alter such responses. The present study shows that persistent pulmonary BCG infection of C57BL/6 mice induced an increase in gamma interferon, a reduction in interleukin-5, and a decrease in lung eosinophilia during subsequent Cryptococcus infection. This effect was long lasting, depended on the presence of live bacteria, and required persistence of mycobacterial infection in the lung. Reduction of eosinophilia was less prominent after infection with a mutant BCG strain (DeltahspR), which was rapidly cleared from the lungs. These observations have important implications for the development of vaccines designed to prevent Th2-mediated disease and indicate that prior lung BCG vaccination can alter the pattern of subsequent host inflammation.
-------------------------------------

10008187_234 - 0.788460137726 - science
[dc, skin, response, immune, cell, cutaneous, assay, dc-based, use, function]

Dendritic cells and the assessment in vitro of skin sensitizing potential.
It is now well established that dendritic cells (DC) play pivotal roles in the initiation and orchestration of adaptive immune responses, including cutaneous immune responses to chemical allergens that drive the acquisition of skin sensitization. It is not unexpected, therefore, that a large number, and wide variety, of proposed approaches for the identification of skin sensitizing chemicals in vitro are based upon the use of cultured DC or DC-like cells. The use of DC in this context is legitimate. However, with our rapidly increasing understanding of the diversity of cutaneous DC with respect to both phenotype and function, it is timely now to review briefly the potential limitations and interpretive difficulties that are associated with the use of DC-based assays. Among the important considerations are the fact that chemical-induced changes in the characteristics and function of cultured DC will not necessarily reflect accurately the events that that support the development of skin sensitization in vivo. In addition, most DC-based assays are predicated on a view that cutaneous DC have as their primary function the initiation of adaptive immune responses. However, it is now appreciated that cutaneous DC, and in particular epidermal Langerhans cells (LC), may also play important immunoregulatory roles that serve to limit and contain skin immune responses. Notwithstanding these considerations there is reason to believe that at least some in vitro DC-based assays are of value, and indeed some are currently the subject of a formal validation process. However, it is appropriate that such assays are configured and interpreted carefully, and with an appreciation of the complexity of DC biology.
-------------------------------------

10008953_234 - 0.734098031949 - science
[leptin, crp, level, adiposity, measure, resistance, subject]

Epidemiological evidence against a role for C-reactive protein causing leptin resistance.
OBJECTIVE: It has been suggested that elevated levels of C-reactive protein (CRP) might interfere with leptin signalling and contribute to leptin resistance. Our aim was to assess whether plasma levels of CRP influence leptin resistance in humans; and our hypothesis was that CRP levels would modify the cross-sectional relationships between leptin and measures of adiposity. DESIGN AND METHODS: We assessed 4 measures of adiposity: body mass index, waist circumference, fat mass, and % body fat in 2113 British Regional Heart Study (BRHS) men (mean (SD) age 69 (5) years), with replication in 760 (age 69 (6) years) European Male Aging Study (EMAS) subjects. RESULTS: In BRHS subjects leptin correlated with CRP (Spearman's r=0.22, p<0.0001). Leptin and CRP correlated with all 4 measures of adiposity (r-value range: 0.22 to 0.57, all p<0.0001). Age-adjusted mean levels for adiposity measures increased in relation to leptin levels; but CRP level did not consistently influence the β coefficients of the regression lines in a CRP-stratified analysis. In BRHS subjects, the BMI vs. leptin relationship demonstrated a weak statistical interaction with CRP (p=0.04). We observed no similar interaction in EMAS subjects, and no significant interactions with other measures of adiposity in BRHS or EMAS cohorts. CONCLUSION: We have shown that plasma CRP has little influence on the relationship between measures of adiposity and serum leptin levels in these middle-aged and elderly male European cohorts. This study provides epidemiological evidence against CRP having a significant role in causing leptin resistance.
-------------------------------------

10007663_234 - 0.915930323482 - science
[radiation, study, kinetics, mineral, hydrated, synchrotron, mechanism, calcium, energetic, silicate]

Dehydration/recrystallization mechanisms, energetics, and kinetics of hydrated calcium silicate minerals: An in situ TGA/DSC and synchrotron radiation SAXS/WAXS study
cited By (since 1996) 22
-------------------------------------

10007485_234 - 0.775622522386 - science
[ctc, tumour, detection, metastasis, cancer]

Circulating tumour cells, their role in metastasis and their clinical utility in lung cancer.
Circulating tumour cells (CTCs) have attracted much recent interest in cancer research as a potential biomarker and as a means of studying the process of metastasis. It has long been understood that metastasis is a hallmark of malignancy, and conceptual theories on the basis of metastasis from the nineteenth century foretold the existence of a tumour "seed" which is capable of establishing discrete tumours in the "soil" of distant organs. This prescient "seed and soil" hypothesis accurately predicted the existence of CTCs; microscopic tumour fragments in the blood, at least some of which are capable of forming metastases. However, it is only in recent years that reliable, reproducible methods of CTC detection and analysis have been developed. To date, the majority of studies have employed the CellSearch™ system (Veridex LLC), which is an immunomagnetic purification method. Other promising techniques include microfluidic filters, isolation of tumour cells by size using microporous polycarbonate filters and flow cytometry-based approaches. While many challenges still exist, the detection of CTCs in blood is becoming increasingly feasible, giving rise to some tantalizing questions about the use of CTCs as a potential biomarker. CTC enumeration has been used to guide prognosis in patients with metastatic disease, and to act as a surrogate marker for disease response during therapy. Other possible uses for CTC detection include prognostication in early stage patients, identifying patients requiring adjuvant therapy, or in surveillance, for the detection of relapsing disease. Another exciting possible use for CTC detection assays is the molecular and genetic characterization of CTCs to act as a "liquid biopsy" representative of the primary tumour. Indeed it has already been demonstrated that it is possible to detect HER2, KRAS and EGFR mutation status in breast, colon and lung cancer CTCs respectively. In the course of this review, we shall discuss the biology of CTCs and their role in metastagenesis, the most commonly used techniques for their detection and the evidence to date of their clinical utility, with particular reference to lung cancer.
-------------------------------------

10008939_234 - 0.78077841476 - medicine
[corneal, diabetic, neuropathy, peripheral]

Assessing corneal nerve structure and function in diabetic neuropathy.
The accurate detection and quantification of human diabetic peripheral neuropathy are important to define at-risk patients, anticipate deterioration and assess new therapies. Two emerging ophthalmic techniques, namely, corneal confocal microscopy and corneal aesthesiometry, demonstrate the ability to diagnose, quantify severity and assess therapeutic benefit in diabetic peripheral neuropathy. Corneal confocal microscopy allows quantification of corneal nerve morphology and non-contact corneal aesthesiometry assesses corneal sensitivity. The present review provides a detailed critique of the rationale, practical application in terms of the instruments used to capture images and the basis on which images are interpreted and analysed. We also critically evaluate how these two new non-invasive ophthalmic tests can be deployed to diagnose diabetic and other peripheral neuropathies.
-------------------------------------

10009450_234 - 0.917890798299 - medicine
[patients, clinical, raynaud, times, evaluation, assessment, cited, preliminary, semi-automated, capillaroscopy]

Preliminary Clinical Evaluation of Semi-automated Nailfold Capillaroscopy in the Assessment of Patients with Raynaud's Phenomenon
Times Cited: 2
-------------------------------------

10003256_234 - 0.751034631314 - science
[oxide, transition, stress, interface, study, phase, 3dap, alloy, layer, metal]

Towards a mechanistic understanding of corrosion mechanisms in zirconium alloys
Understanding the key corrosion mechanisms in a light water reactor primary water environment is critical to developing and exploiting improved zirconium alloy fuel cladding. In this paper, we report recent research highlights from a new collaborative research programme involving 3 U.K. universities and 5 partners from the nuclear industry. A major part of our strategy is to use the most advanced analytical tools to characterise the oxide and metal/oxide interface microstructure, residual stresses, as well as the transport properties of the oxide. These techniques include three-dimensional atom probe (3DAP), advanced transmission electron microscopy (TEM), synchrotron X-ray diffraction, Raman spectroscopy, and in situ electro-impedance spectroscopy. Synchrotron X-ray studies have enabled the characterisation of stresses, tetragonal phase fraction, and texture in the oxide as well as the stresses in the metal substrate. It was found that in the thick oxide (here, Optimized-ZIRLO, a trademark of the Westinghouse Electric Company, tested at 415°C in steam) a significant stress profile can be observed, which cannot be explained by metal substrate creep alone but that local delamination of the oxide layers due to crack formation must also play an important role. It was also found that the oxide stresses in the monoclinic and tetragonal phases grown on Zircaloy-4 (autoclave testing at 360°C) first relax during the pre-transition stage. Just before transition, the compressive stress in the monoclinic phase suddenly rises, which is interpreted as indirect evidence of significant tetragonal to monoclinic phase transformation taking place at this stage. TEM studies of pre- and post-transition oxides grown on ZIRLO, a trademark of the Westinghouse Electric Company, have used Fresnel contrast imaging to identify nano-sized pores along the columnar grain boundaries that form a network interconnected once the material goes through transition. The development of porosity during transition was further confirmed by in situ electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) studies. 3DAP analysis was used to identify a ZrO sub-oxide layer at the metal/oxide interface and to establish its three-dimensional morphology. It was possible to demonstrate that this sub-oxide structure develops with time and changes dramatically around transition. This observation was further confirmed by in situ EIS studies, which also suggest thinning of the sub-oxide/barrier layer around transition. Finally, 3DAP analysis was used to characterise segregation of alloying elements near the metal/oxide interface and to establish that the corroding metal near the interface (in this case ZIRLO) after 100 days at 360°C displays a substantially different chemistry and microstructure compared to the base alloy with Fe segregating to the Zr/ZrO interface.
-------------------------------------

10008858_234 - 0.786303820973 - medicine
[trial, therapist, size, patient, power, treatment, sample, therapy, multiple-membership, type]

Design and analysis of non-pharmacological treatment trials with multiple therapists per patient
In trials of physical and talking therapies, nesting of patients within therapists has statistical implications analogous to those of cluster randomised trials. Nevertheless, the clustering effect may be more complex, as it interacts with treatment. For some therapies, individual patients may receive care from multiple therapists of the same type, so that patients are no longer strictly nested within therapists, creating a ‘multiple-membership’ relationship between patients and therapists.This paper considers methods of analysis and sample size estimation for trials with multiple-membership clustering effects. It is motivated by a trial of a psychotherapy for the treatment of adolescent depression with cognitive behavioural therapy. We tested methods and issues in a Monte Carlo simulation study, simulating trials with multiple membership. Results demonstrate satisfactory performance in terms of convergence and give estimates of the intra-cluster correlation coefficient and empirical test size similar to a simple hierarchical design.We derive formulae for sample size and power for multiple-membership trial designs. We then compare estimates of power from this formula with empirical power derived from the simulation study. Finally, we show that we can easily extend formulae for sample size and power to allow consideration of power and sample size for certain types of more complex interventions. These include situations where therapists of different types deliver separate components of the intervention, creating a cross-classified relationship, or where several therapists deliver a group-administered treatment, creating further levels. Copyright © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
-------------------------------------

10008185_234 - 0.915977777192 - science
[skin, chemical, receptor, sensitization, danger, necessary]

Danger, intracellular signaling, and the orchestration of dendritic cell function in skin sensitization.
Allergic contact dermatitis is an important occupational and environmental disease caused by topical exposure to chemical allergens. An area of considerable interest and, in the context of hazard identification and characterization, an area of great importance is developing an understanding of the characteristics that confer on chemicals the ability to cause skin sensitization. For the successful acquisition of skin sensitization, it is necessary that a chemical must gain access to the viable epidermis, form stable immunogenic associations with host proteins, and provide the necessary stimuli for the activation, mobilization, and maturation of skin dendritic cells (DC). It is the last of these properties that is the subject of this article. The purpose here is to review the mechanisms through which skin sensitizers provide the triggers necessary for engagement of cutaneous DC. Of particular interest are the nature and function of danger signals elicited by skin sensitizing chemicals. Among the pathways considered here are those involving Toll-like receptors, C-type lectin receptors, neuropeptide receptors, prostanoid receptors, and the inflammasome. Collectively, danger signals in the skin provide a bridge between the innate and adaptive immune systems and are of pivotal importance for the initiation of cutaneous immune responses, including those to chemical allergens that result in skin sensitization.
-------------------------------------

10018163_234 - 0.951439320634 - science
[flavin, electron, mfc, concentration, current, shuttle, cell, mu]

The effect of flavin electron shuttles in microbial fuel cells current production
The effect of electron shuttles on electron transfer to microbial fuel cell (MFC) anodes was studied in systems where direct contact with the anode was precluded. MFCs were inoculated with Shewanella cells, and flavins used as the electron shuttling compound. In MFCs with no added electron shuttles, flavin concentrations monitored in the MFCs' bulk liquid increased continuously with FMN as the predominant flavin. The maximum concentrations were 0.6 mu M for flavin mononucleotide and 0.2 mu M for riboflavin. In MFCs with added flavins, micro-molar concentrations were shown to increase current and power output. The peak current was at least four times higher in MFCs with high concentrations of flavins (4.5-5.5 mu M) than in MFCs with low concentrations (0.2-0.6 mu M). Although high power outputs (around 150 mW/m(2)) were achieved in MFCs with high concentrations of flavins, a Clostridium-like bacterium along with other reactor limitations affected overall coulombic efficiencies (CE) obtained, achieving a maximum CE of 13\%. Electron shuttle compounds (flavins) permitted bacteria to utilise a remote electron acceptor (anode) that was not accessible to the cells allowing current production until the electron donor (lactate) was consumed.
-------------------------------------

10009020_234 - 0.710449107309 - technology_and_computing
[tool, document, type, design, user, visual]

User-Centered Design of a Visual Data Mapping Tool
Understanding the meaning and the type of a business document received by a company is important in order to determine an appropriate response. We have developed a visual tool allowing ordinary users to express mappings between arriving documents and their elements on one side and the different document types on the other. The tool is used to set up and continuously update an automatic semantic analysis mechanism which determines the document type from a set of information items contained in the document, thus allowing automatic processing associated with the types to be applied to the arriving document instances. The activities performed by end users within the visual data mapping tool are quite complex and require user-centric design to ensure tool is useful and usable. In this paper we describe the user-centric process informing the design of the tool. We conducted two workshops to discover the mental models of our users regarding the information content in their documents and their requirements towards the design of the tool. Subsequently, these findings were used to design and implement the visual data mapping tool. The resulting system was evaluated by target end users who proficiently demonstrated the usability of the developed concepts and features.
-------------------------------------

10016813_234 - 0.739146664513 - science
[microarray, ecological, gene]

Microarray challenges in ecology
Microarrays are used to measure simultaneously the amount of mRNAs transcribed from many genes. They were originally designed for gene expression profiling in relatively simple biological systems, such as cell lines and model systems under constant laboratory conditions. This poses a challenge to ecologists who increasingly want to use microarrays to unravel the genetic mechanisms underlying complex interactions among organisms and between organisms and their environment. Here, we discuss typical experimental and statistical problems that arise when analyzing genome-wide expression profiles in an ecological context. We show that experimental design and environmental confounders greatly influence the identification of candidate genes in ecological microarray studies, and that following several simple recommendations could facilitate the analysis of microarray data in ecological settings. ?? 2007 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
-------------------------------------

10010317_234 - 0.878379865825 - science
[phenotypic, line, qtl, spectrometry, system-wide, mass, trait, time-of-flight, molecular, arabidopsis]

System-wide molecular evidence for phenotypic buffering in Arabidopsis
We profiled 162 lines of Arabidopsis for variation in transcript, protein and metabolite abundance using mRNA microarrays, two-dimensional polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis, gas chromatography time-of-flight mass spectrometry, liquid chromatography quadrupole time-of-flight mass spectrometry, and proton nuclear magnetic resonance. We added all publicly available phenotypic data from the same lines and mapped quantitative trait loci (QTL) for 40,580 molecular and 139 phenotypic traits. We found six QTL hot spots with major, system-wide effects, suggesting there are six breakpoints in a system otherwise buffered against many of the 500,000 SNPs. ?? 2009 Nature America, Inc. All rights reserved.
-------------------------------------

10003272_234 - 0.759514924461 - science
[trpv3, human, hair, growth]

Activation of transient receptor potential vanilloid-3 inhibits human hair growth.
In the current study, we aimed at identifying the functional role of transient receptor potential vanilloid-3 (TRPV3) ion channel in the regulation of human hair growth. Using human organ-cultured hair follicles (HFs) and cultures of human outer root sheath (ORS) keratinocytes, we provide the first evidence that activation of TRPV3 inhibits human hair growth. TRPV3 immunoreactivity was confined to epithelial compartments of the human HF, mainly to the ORS. In organ culture, TRPV3 activation by plant-derived (e.g., eugenol, 10-1,000 μM) or synthetic (e.g., 2-aminoethoxydiphenyl borate, 1-300 μM) agonists resulted in a dose-dependent inhibition of hair shaft elongation, suppression of proliferation, and induction of apoptosis and premature HF regression (catagen). Human ORS keratinocytes also expressed functional TRPV3, whose stimulation induced membrane currents, elevated intracellular calcium concentration, inhibited proliferation, and induced apoptosis. Of great importance, these effects on ORS keratinocytes were all mediated by TRPV3, as small interfering RNA-mediated silencing of TRPV3 effectively abrogated the cellular actions of the above agonists. These findings collectively support the concept that TRPV3 signaling is a significant player in human hair growth control. Therefore, TRPV3 and the related intracellular signaling mechanism might function as a promising target for pharmacological manipulations of clinically relevant hair growth disorders.
-------------------------------------

10018321_234 - 0.952200146991 - medicine
[infection, patient, agonist, benzodiazepine, ill, adrenoceptor, sedative, critical, care, opioid]

Sedation & immunomodulation.
The management of critically ill patients necessitates the use of sedatives and analgesics to provide patient comfort and cooperation. These drugs exert profound effects on all organ systems, not only the central nervous system, and this article describes the immunologic effects of the commonly used critical care sedatives: propofol, the benzodiazepines, opioids, and alpha(2)-adrenoceptor agonists. Benzodiazepines, opioids, and possibly even propofol worsen outcome in animal models of infection, whereas preliminary evidence suggests that the alpha(2)-adrenoceptor agonist, dexmedetomidine, may improve outcomes in the setting of infection. Given the burden of sepsis and secondary infections in critical care, choice of sedation may need to be carefully considered to preserve immune responses in critically ill patients.
-------------------------------------

10008536_234 - 0.881038655295 - education
[student, assessment]

Using online assessment to provide instant feedback
For the past five years we have been using a method inspired by the just-in-time-teachingapproach to teach our first year Newtonian mechanics class, which typically contains 240-280 students. This replaced a standard course, that did not engage the students sufficiently.With such a large cohort, it is difficult to mark students' assessments quickly, and give therequired feedback in a timely manner. We discuss how we capture students‟ marks andcommon difficulties in a short period, so we can plan an example class addressing these.We explain why we have chosen a commercial e-assessment tool. We discuss the types ofassignments available, especially those which allow for algebraic answers, and show whichtypes of assessments were found most effective, and describe the underlying reasons. Wewill specifically discuss the steps that were needed to take to create a positive experiencefor the students—our initial experience was quite negative, and influenced the students'engagement.We discuss in detail the important lessons we have learned about the mechanisms of qualitycontrol that underlie the use of online mathematical assessments. The core step in ourmethod is to use student answers to test the quality of questions. The way of performingquality tests is highly non-trivial and time-consuming, but is crucially important. Finally, weshall discuss further developments that would make this type of rich assessment more usefulto the students.
-------------------------------------

10005554_234 - 0.834738056853 - science
[resistance, aspergillosis, azole, number]

Azole antifungal resistance today: focus on Aspergillus.
Oral triazole therapy is well established for the treatment of invasive aspergillosis (IPA), allergic aspergillosis (ABPA), and chronic pulmonary aspergillosis (CPA), and is often long-term. Resistance to triazole azole antifungal drugs in Aspergillus fumigatus is now a major clinical problem in a number of European locations, in China, Canada and the USA with particularly high frequencies from the north-west of the UK, and The Netherlands. A number of centers are reporting the continuing increasing frequency and evolution of resistance mechanisms in A. fumigatus, in both azole-naïve and patients treated with azoles. The increasing rate of resistance is of concern. A number of resistance mechanisms have been found. The biofilm modality of Aspergillus growth may have a number of therapeutic implications for aspergillosis, including antifungal resistance. Microbiological diagnosis of aspergillosis is limited by poor culture yield, leading to uncertainty about the frequency of triazole resistance. Direct resistance testing in culture-negative clinical samples may add additional insights into the prevalence of azole resistance in A. fumigatus.
-------------------------------------

10008766_234 - 0.797369978451 - science
[anidulafungin, antifungal, human, regimen, hcme, candida, datum, model, neonate, effect]

Anidulafungin for neonatal hematogenous Candida meningoencephalitis: identification of candidate regimens for humans using a translational pharmacological approach.
Hematogenous Candida meningoencephalitis (HCME) is a serious infection in premature neonates. Anidulafungin is an echinocandin antifungal agent with potent activity against Candida spp., but its efficacy and optimal regimens for human neonates with HCME are not known. A well-validated rabbit model of HCME was used to define pharmacokinetic-pharmacodynamic (PK-PD) relationships of anidulafungin. A mathematical model was fitted to the entire data set. The experimental data were bridged to humans. A population PK model was fitted to the data from human neonates receiving anidulafungin receiving a loading dose of 3 mg/kg, followed by 1.5 mg/kg/day. Monte Carlo simulations were performed to identify candidate anidulafungin regimens for humans. All untreated rabbits succumbed by ≤96 h postinoculation. The PK of anidulafungin was linear with dose-dependent penetration into the cerebrum. Anidulafungin exerted a rapid antifungal effect that was apparent in the first dosing interval. Near-maximal antifungal activity was observed with dosages of 10 to 20 mg/kg/day. The bridging studies suggested that the current regimen of first 3 mg/kg, followed by 1.5 mg/kg/day, is suboptimal. Higher dosages were associated with progressively greater antifungal effect. Anidulafungin is effective for the treatment of experimental HCME. Higher dosages than those currently used for clinical care are required for maximal antifungal effect.
-------------------------------------

10009747_234 - 0.821298750261 - medicine
[fungal, patient, air]

Fungal surveillance of an open haematology ward.
Air sampling and surveillance cultures for fungi were performed in a Scottish general haematology ward over a five-month period in 1997. The mean total fungal count from the air sampling appeared to be correlated with the number of patients colonized by Aspergillus. The most commonly isolated species were Aspergillus versicolor, A. fumigatus and A. niger. Rooms with portable air filtration units had significantly lower total fungal counts than the others. Swabs were taken from 70 patients (mean age 62 years); 114 of the 563 cultures (20.2%) were positive. The most commonly isolated species were A. fumigatus, Candida albicans, C. glabrata and C. parapsilosis. Samples taken from the tongue and perineum showed colonization more often than those taken from the nostrils. Almost half the patients (48.6%) were colonized on, or within seven days of, admission; 11.4% became colonized whilst on the unit. One patient developed fatal aspergillosis. We conclude that colonization or high air-borne spore concentrations are not necessarily predictive of fungal infection but may prompt early treatment or more aggressive prophylaxis of potentially fatal invasive infections.
-------------------------------------

10007985_234 - 0.772238374956 - science
[binary, microlensing, dwarf, weak, ogle-2008-blg-510, brown, anomaly, detection, real-time, automated]

OGLE-2008-BLG-510: first automated real-time detection of a weak microlensing anomaly - brown dwarf or stellar binary?
DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2966.2012.21233.x; eprintid: arXiv:1203.1291
-------------------------------------

10003925_234 - 0.738715904253 - technology_and_computing
[system, dynamical, automaton, inevitability]

Dynamically-Driven Timed Automaton Abstractions for Proving Liveness of Continuous Systems
We look at the problem of proving inevitability of continuousdynamical systems. An inevitability property says that a region of thestate space will eventually be reached: this is a type of liveness propertyfrom the computer science viewpoint, and is related to attractivity of setsin dynamical systems. We consider a method of Maler and Batt to makean abstraction of a continuous dynamical system to a timed automaton,and show that a potentially infinite number of splits will be made if thesplitting of the state space is made arbitrarily. To solve this problem, wedefine a method which creates a finite-sized timed automaton abstractionfor a class of linear dynamical systems, and show that this timedabstraction proves inevitability.
-------------------------------------

10004897_234 - 0.745180014466 - medicine
[disease, parkinson, cognitive, depression, anxiety, participant, test]

Depression, anxiety, and cognitive deficits in Parkinson’s Disease MSc Dissertation.
Depression has been suggested to be a frequently co-occurring symptom in Parkinson’s disease (PD) and research evidence has associated the disorder with impaired performance on a number of cognitive tests, especially those indicating frontal lobe cognitive dysfunction. The current study explored the relationship between depression and anxiety in Parkinson’s disease and frontal lobe cognitive impairment. Twenty community-based participants with PD were compared with 20 participants, over the age of 60 years, without a diagnosis of Parkinson’s disease, matched for age, sex, educational level, and pre-morbid intelligence. The Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale (HADS) was used to measure mood, and the FAS Verbal Fluency test, the Wisconsin Card Sorting Test, and a Stroop test were employed to measure frontal lobe cognitive functioning.  The group with Parkinson’s disease was characterised by greater anxiety and depression, in addition to impaired Verbal Fluency performance, compared with the group without the disorder. Participants with PD and major depression as defined by the HADS exhibited greater general cognitive impairment as measured by the Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE). Younger participants and those in whom the disease had been diagnosed at a younger age were more likely to suffer from anxiety. A number of participants with Parkinson’s disease exhibited co-morbid anxiety and depression. In addition, four of the research sample with Parkinson’s disease scored below the cut-off point on the MMSE indicative of cognitive impairment sufficient to suggest dementia. Implications for those living with Parkinson’s disease plus recommendations for future research are discussed.
-------------------------------------

10003551_234 - 0.823858831287 - science
[iga, gene, microarray, experiment, class, interpretation, result, iterative, approach, analysis]

Iterative Group Analysis (iGA): A simple tool to enhance sensitivity and facilitate interpretation of microarray experiments
Background: The biological interpretation of even a simple microarray experiment can be a challenging and highly complex task. Here we present a new method (Iterative Group Analysis) to facilitate, improve, and accelerate this process. Results: Our Iterative Group Analysis approach (iGA) uses elementary statistics to identify those functional classes of genes that are significantly changed in an experiment and at the same time determines which of the class members are most likely to be differentially expressed. iGA does not require that all members of a class change and is therefore robust against imperfect class assignments, which can be derived from public sources (e.g. GeneOntologies) or automated processes (e.g. key word extraction from gene names). In contrast to previous non-iterative approaches, iGA does not depend on the availability of fixed lists of differentially expressed genes, and thus can be used to increase the sensitivity of gene detection especially in very noisy or small data sets. In the extreme, iGA can even produce statistically meaningful results without any experimental replication. The automated functional annotation provided by iGA greatly reduces the complexity of microarray results and facilitates the interpretation process. In addition, iGA can be used as a fast and efficient tool for the platform-independent comparison of a microarray experiment to the vast number of published results, automatically highlighting shared genes of potential interest. Conclusions: By applying iGA to a wide variety of data from diverse organisms and platforms we show that this approach enhances and accelerates the interpretation of microarray experiments. ?? 2004 Breitling et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd.
-------------------------------------

10017076_234 - 0.900689872674 - science
[skin, ageing, elastic]

A new wrinkle on old skin: the role of elastic fibres in skin ageing.
Synopsis Cutaneous ageing is the result of two distinct, biological processes which may occur concurrently: (i) the passage of time, termed intrinsic ageing and (ii) environmental influences, termed extrinsic ageing. Intrinsic ageing of the skin is a slow process which causes changes in tissue structure and impairs function in the absence of additional biological, chemical and physical factors. The clinical features of intrinsically aged skin are not usually evident until old age when, although smooth and unblemished, the skin surface appears pale and is characterized by fine wrinkles with occasional exaggerated expression lines. Functionally, intrinsically aged skin is dry and less elastic than more youthful skin. In contrast, extrinsically aged skin is exemplified by deep, coarse wrinkles, mottled hyperpigmentation and a marked loss of elasticity and recoil. The two major environmental influences which induce extrinsic ageing are: (i) chronic exposure to solar ultraviolet (UV) irradiation (termed photoageing) and (ii) smoking. This review discusses the changes associated with the ageing process in the skin, with particular emphasis on the role played by the elastic fibre network in maintaining dermal function. The review concludes with a discussion of a short-term assay for independent assessment of the efficacy of anti-ageing cosmetic products using the elastic fibre component fibrillin-1 as a biomarker of extracellular matrix repair.
-------------------------------------

10004145_234 - 0.886315594614 - science
[ncc, gut, neural, hscr, cell, migration, crest]

Balancing neural crest cell intrinsic processes with those of the microenvironment in Tcof1 haploinsufficient mice enables complete enteric nervous system formation.
The enteric nervous system (ENS) comprises a complex neuronal network that regulates peristalsis of the gut wall and secretions into the lumen. The ENS is formed from a multipotent progenitor cell population called the neural crest, which is derived from the neuroepithelium. Neural crest cells (NCCs) migrate over incredible distances to colonize the entire length of the gut and during their migration they must survive, proliferate and ultimately differentiate. The absence of an ENS from variable lengths of the colon results in Hirschsprung's disease (HSCR) or colonic aganglionosis. Mutations in about 12 different genes have been identified in HSCR patients but the complex pattern of inheritance and variable penetrance suggests that additional genes or modifiers must be involved in the etiology and pathogenesis of this disease. We discovered that Tcof1 haploinsufficiency in mice models many of the early features of HSCR. Neuroepithelial apoptosis diminished the size of the neural stem cell pool resulting in reduced NCC numbers and their delayed migration along the gut from E10.5 to E14.5. Surprisingly however, we observe continued and complete colonization of the entire colon throughout E14.5-E18.5, a period in which the gut is considered to be non- or less-permissive to NCC. Thus, we reveal for the first time that reduced NCC progenitor numbers and delayed migration do not unequivocally equate with a predisposition for the pathogenesis of HSCR. In fact, these deficiencies can be overcome by balancing NCC intrinsic processes of proliferation and differentiation with extrinsic influences of the gut microenvironment.
-------------------------------------

10011017_234 - 0.852824232351 - science
[implication, sorption, groundwater, ph, site, effect, mobility, strontium, ionic, aquifer]

Effect of groundwater pH and ionic strength on strontium sorption in aquifer sediments: Implications for 90Sr mobility at contaminated nuclear sites
cited By (since 1996) 0
-------------------------------------

10005275_234 - 0.832167781315 - science
[cell, matrix, nodule, remodeling, cord, expression, increase, force]

The mechanical environment in dupuytren's contracture determines cell contractility and associated MMP-mediated matrix remodeling.
Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are expressed in Dupuytren's contracture and play a role in matrix remodeling. We tested the role of tension on contractility and MMP expression in Dupuytren's nodule and cord cells. Cells were subjected to pre-determined loading patterns of known repeatable magnitudes (static load, unloading, and overloading) and tested for MMP gene expression (MMP-1, -2, -9, -13, and TIMP-1, -2) and force generation using a tension-culture force monitor. Matrix remodeling was assessed by addition of cytochalasin D and residual matrix tension was quantified. Nodule compared to cord and control cells demonstrate greater force generation and remodeling (p < 0.05). Nodule cells subjected to a reduced load and overloading led to threefold increase of MMP-1, -2, and -9 compared to static load, whilst cord and control cells only showed a twofold increase of MMP-9. Nodule cells subjected to overloading showed a twofold increase in TIMP-2 expression, whilst cord and control cells showed a twofold increase in TIMP-1 expression. Nodule cells differ from cord cells by increased force generation in response to changes in the mechanical environment and related MMP/TIMP-mediated matrix remodeling. In turn this may lead to permanent matrix shortening and digital contracture. Interventional therapies should be aimed at nodule cells to prevent contraction and subsequent permanent matrix remodeling. © 2012 Orthopaedic Research Society. Published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc. J Orthop Res.
-------------------------------------

10005288_234 - 0.91178186523 - science
[tendon, zone, cell, acellular, healing, suture, study, formation]

The cell biology of suturing tendons.
Trauma by suturing tendon form areas devoid of cells termed "acellular zones" in the matrix. This study aimed to characterise the cellular insult of suturing and acellular zone formation in mouse tendon. Acellular zone formation was evaluated using single grasping sutures placed using flexor tendons with time lapse cell viability imaging for a period of 12h. Both tension and injury were required to induce cell death and cell movement in the formation of the acellular zone. DNA fragmentation studies and transmission electron microscopy indicated that cells necrosed. Parallel in vivo studies showed that cell-to-cell contacts were disrupted following grasping by the suture in tensioned tendon. Without tension, cell death was lessened and cell-to-cell contacts remained intact. Quantitative immunohistochemistry and 3D cellular profile mapping of wound healing markers over a one year time course showed that acellular zones arise rapidly and showed no evidence of healing whilst the wound healing response occurred in the surrounding tissues. The acellular zones were also evident in a standard modified "Kessler" clinical repair. In conclusion, the suture repair of injured tendons produces acellular zones, which may potentially cause early tendon failure.
-------------------------------------

10009824_234 - 0.73832546684 - science
[animal, clotrimazole, combination, examination, treatment, guinea, culture, pig, clinical, infection]

Comparative in-vivo activity of clotrimazole and a clotrimazole/hydrocortisone combination in the treatment of experimental dermatophytosis in guinea pigs.
To compare the activity of clotrimazole with a clotrimazole/hydrocortisone combination, guinea pigs were infected with Trichophyton mentagrophytes var. mentagrophytes. The animals were treated with once daily application of clotrimazole alone, hydrocortisone alone, base alone or a combination of clotrimazole and hydrocortisone. One group of animals was left untreated. Daily clinical observations were made. At intervals during the three week study animals were killed, skin scrapings were taken for microscopical examination and culture and skin was removed for histological examination. The responses of the guinea pigs treated with the base alone reflected those of the untreated controls. They were mycologically positive throughout the study and showed extensive inflammatory reactions on histology. Animals treated with hydrocortisone alone rapidly developed a severe clinical infection and mycological examination was positive throughout. Animals treated with clotrimazole alone did not show severe clinical reactions and were negative on culture after four treatments; histology showed inflammatory scabs after resolution of infection. Clinically, the animals receiving combination therapy improved most quickly and cultures were negative after two treatments. Histological examination showed resolution of the infection and little inflammation.
-------------------------------------

10008192_234 - 0.840671401603 - science
[reactivity, chemical, allergen, respiratory, peptide, competitive, condition, selectivity, lysine, assay]

The selective peptide reactivity of chemical respiratory allergens under competitive and non-competitive conditions.
It is well established that certain chemicals cause respiratory allergy. In common with contact allergens, chemicals that induce sensitization of the respiratory tract must form stable associations with host proteins to elicit an immune response. Measurement of the reactivity of chemical allergens to single nucleophilic peptides is increasingly well-described, and standardized assays have been developed for use in hazard assessment. This study employed standard and modified peptide reactivity assays to investigate the selectivity of chemical respiratory allergens for individual amino acids under competitive and non-competitive conditions. The reactivity of 20 known chemical respiratory sensitizers (including diisocyanates, anhydrides, and reactive dyes) were evaluated for reactivity towards individual peptides containing cysteine, lysine, histidine, arginine, or tyrosine. Respiratory allergens exhibited the common ability to deplete both lysine and cysteine peptides; however, reactivity for histidine, arginine, and tyrosine varied between chemicals, indicating differences in relative binding affinity toward each nucleophile. To evaluate amino acid selectivity for cysteine and lysine under competitive conditions a modified assay was used in which reaction mixtures contained different relative concentrations of the target peptides. Under these reaction conditions, the binding preferences of reference respiratory and contact allergens (dinitrochlorobenzene, dinitrofluorobenzene) were evaluated. Discrete patterns of reactivity were observed showing various levels of competitive selectivity between the two allergen classes.
-------------------------------------

10018235_234 - 0.70433882442 - science
[organic, liquid, crystal, crystalline, development, semiconductor, nature, chap, field]

Columnar Liquid Crystalline Semiconductors
This is an exciting stage in the development of organic electronics. No longer is it an area of purely ‘academic interest’ but increasingly real applications are being developed and some of these are beginning to come on-stream. There have been several drivers for the surge of interest shown by the electronics industry. Perhaps the greatest is the promise afforded by organic systems for low-cost processing, e.g., methods of fabrication such as roll-to-roll contact printing or ink-jet printing in which the components are ‘assembled’ on low-cost substrates at room temperature. The long-term vision is for the creation of integrated devices in which, for example, a photovoltaic cell, a sensor and a display, all made of organic materials, is printed onto a plastic film in a single operation. Another factor in the recent development of organic electronics is the huge advances made in organic synthesis over the last half century, which make it easy to fine-tune the properties of organics at a molecular level in a way that is simply not possible for their metallic and semi-metallic counterparts. Finally, organics are much easier to interface with biomaterials, which is perhaps the key problem in the development of new generation biosensors. Another consideration in the development of organic electronics has been ‘Green Issues’: not only the need to develop energy-efficient methods of manufacture but also the need to develop methods based on renewable (organic) rather than finite (inorganic and metallic) components.Although it seems improbable that organics will ever compete with silicon-based devices in terms of high-end computing applications, where device speed is of the essence, there are many low-end areas of application, where we can look to see traditional inorganic components increasingly replaced by organics. Areas that have already been commercially developed or which are under intensive development include organic light emitting diodes (for flat panel displays and solid state lighting), organic photovoltaic cells, organic thin film transistors (for smart tags and flat panel displays) and sensors. Potentially this is a field that will affect every aspect of our lives and have an impact in every home and in every business.Within the family of organic electronic materials, liquid crystals are relative newcomers. The first electronically conducting liquid crystals were only reported in 1988, but already a substantial literature has developed. The potential advantage of liquid crystalline semiconductors is that they have the easy processabilty of amorphous and polymeric semiconductors, but they usually have higher charge carrier mobilities. Their mobilities do not reach the levels seen in crystalline organics, but they circumvent all of the difficult issues of controlling crystal growth and morphology. Liquid crystals self-organise, they can be aligned by fields and surface forces and, because of their fluid nature, defects in liquid crystal structures readily self-heal.Because this is a relatively young field, there are still issues which need to be understood. In particular, the theory of electronic conduction in liquid crystals is much less well developed than that of electronic conduction in other organic mate- rials and, although the relationship between molecular structure and conductivity is mostly understood, some issues still remain to be resolved and understood.With these matters in mind, this is an opportune moment to bring together a monograph on the subject of ‘Liquid Crystalline Semiconductors’. The field is already too large to cover in a comprehensive manner, so our aim has been to bring together contributions from leading workers, which cover the main areas of the chemistry (synthesis and structure/function relationships), physics and potential applications. A general introduction to liquid crystals and the nature and kinds of their mesomorphic behaviour and structure (mesophases) is given in Chap. 1. A description of the nature and mechanisms of different kinds of charge transport in calamitic (nematic and smectic) liquid crystalline semiconductors is given in Chap. 2 followed by a similar treatment of columnar (discotic) liquid crystalline semiconductors in Chap. 3. The different approaches and methods of determining charge transport in liquid crystals are also described in detail. Chap. 4 provides a comprehensive description of the synthesis of a wide range of columnar liquid crystalline semiconductors. A series of reaction schemes are used to illustrate different synthetic strategies and approaches to the synthesis of this special type of liquid crystal. Chapter 5 gives an extensive discussion of the nature and magnitude of charge transport in reactive mesogens (monomers) and how they are determined. A similar treatment of the corresponding liquid crystal polymer networks is also given in this chapter. An insight into the nature and complexity of the optical properties of liquid crystals is provided in Chap. 6. Chapters 7, 8 and 9 describe the modes of operation, configuration and performance of a range of electrooptic devices, i.e., organic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs), especially with polarised emission, organic photovoltaics and organic field-effect transistors, incorporating the types of liquid crystalline semiconductors described in the preceding chapters. Our hope is that this book will provide a useful introduction to the field both for those in industry and for those in academia and that it will help to stimulate future developments.
-------------------------------------

10005194_234 - 0.96441359993 - science
[adsorption, calcite, surface, different, uranyl, energy, free]

Atomistic Simulations of Calcium Uranyl(VI) Carbonate Adsorption on Calcite and Stepped-Calcite Surfaces
Adsorption of actinyl ions onto mineral surfaces is one of the main mechanisms that control the migration of these ions in environmental systems. Here, we present computational classical molecular dynamics (MD) simulations to investigate the behavior of U(VI) in contact with different calcite surfaces. The calcium-uranyl-carbonate Ca2UO2(CO3)(3) species is shown to display both inner and outer-sphere adsorption to the flat {10 (1) over bar4} and the stepped {31 (4) over bar8} and {3 (12) over bar 16} planes of calcite. Free energy calculations, using the umbrella sampling method, are employed to simulate adsorption paths of the same uranyl species on the different calcite surfaces under aqueous condition. Outer-sphere adsorption is found to dominate over inner-sphere adsorption because of the high free energy barrier of removing a uranyl-carbonate interaction and replacing it with a new uranyl-surface interaction. An important bin monolayer between the surface and the sorbed complex. From the free complex was also found to adsorb preferentially on the acute-stepped ding mode is proposed involving a single vicinal water energy profiles of the different Calcite surfaces, the uranyl {31 (4) over bar8} face of calcite, in agreement with experiment.
-------------------------------------

10003522_234 - 0.85562473786 - education
[multiobjective, optimization, learning, seminar]

Learning in Multiobjective Optimization (Dagstuhl Seminar 12041)
This report documents the programme and outcomes of the Dagstuhl Seminar 12041 "Learning in Multiobjective Optimization". The purpose of the seminar was to bring together researchers from the two main communities studying multiobjective optimization, Multiple Criteria Decision Making and Evolutionary Multiobjective Optimization, to take part in a wide-ranging discussion of what constitutes learning in multiobjective optimization, how it can be facilitated, and how it can be measured. The outcome was a deeper, more integrated understanding of the whole problem-solving process in multiobjective optimization from the viewpoint of learning, and several concrete research projects directly addressing different aspects of learning.
-------------------------------------

10018314_234 - 0.904483423221 - science
[bacterial, inflammatory, innate, lung, immune, negative]

The innate immune rheostat: influence on lung inflammatory disease and secondary bacterial pneumonia.
The activity of innate immunity is not simply dictated by the presence of an antigen but also by the balance between negative regulatory and immune potentiator pathways. Even in the absence of antigen, innate immunity can 'inflame' if negative regulators are absent. This resting state is adaptable and dictated by environmental influences, host genetics and past infection history. A return to homoeostasis post inflammation may therefore not leave the tissue in an identical state to that prior to the inflammatory event. This adaptability makes us all unique and also explains the variable outcome experienced by a diverse population to the same inflammatory stimulus. Using murine models we have identified that influenza virus causes a long-term modification of the lung microenvironment by a de-sensitization to bacterial products and an increase in the myeloid negative regulator CD200R (CD200 receptor). These two events prevent subsequent inflammatory damage while the lung is healing, but also they may predispose to bacterial colonization of the lower respiratory tract should regulatory mechanisms overshoot. In the extreme, this leads to bacterial pneumonia, sepsis and death. A deeper understanding of the consequences arising from innate immune cell alteration during influenza infection and the subsequent development of bacterial complications has important implications for future drug development.
-------------------------------------

10011596_234 - 0.910149069465 - medicine
[patient, bowel, obstruction, day, survival, chemotherapy, median, disease]

Bowel obstruction in ovarian and peritoneal malignancy: The Christie Hospital (Manchester, UK) experience.
Bowel Obstruction in Ovarian and Peritoneal Malignancy: The Christie Hospital (Manchester, UK) ExperienceBACKGROUND: Bowel obstruction is a common clinical problem in advanced ovarian and peritoneal malignancy and is associated with a poor prognosis. We previously correlated clinical & radiological factors with outcome demonstrating that significant improvements in overall survival can be gained in a minority of patients1. Here, we extend our analysis to 130 patients with biopsy-proven disease admitted between 2003-2011 with the aims of identifying patients most likely to derive benefit from palliative surgery and/or chemotherapy. RESULTS: The median time from diagnosis to inpatient admission with bowel obstruction was 493 days (range 0-5640). The most common histology was serous adenocarcinoma (44%). The median inpatient stay was 20 days (range 3-110); total parenteral nutrition was instigated in 22% (median duration 14 days). The majority of patients had high (> 5cm) tumour burden at multiple sites, radiological evidence of serosal disease and half developed bowel obstruction whilst receiving chemotherapy. Approximately 50% of patients presented with obstructive symptoms, but 25% presented with erratic bowel habit. Median survival following the first episode of bowel obstruction was 87 days (range 3-1754). Survival was similar between patients who underwent palliative surgery or chemotherapy (p=0.89). Median survival for patients presenting in bowel obstruction with platinum-sensitive (PS) and platinum-resistant (PR) disease (but not chemonaïve patients) who proceeded to chemotherapy was prolonged compared with patients unsuitable for further treatment (PS 191 vs. 24 days, p<0.0001; PR 149 vs. 50 days, p=0.06). A feasibility trial investigating the efficacy of low residue diet and intravenous dexamethasone in the prevention and treatment of malignant bowel obstruction has been initiated.CONCLUSION: Overall survival in patients with malignant bowel obstruction is poor with no significant improvement over the last decade. Bowel obstruction in patients with chemonaïve disease represents an aggressive phenotype with poor prognosis. Judicious selection of patients for surgery and/or chemotherapy can significantly increase survival.
-------------------------------------

10007557_234 - 0.749390940207 - science
[melanoma, thin, tumor, patient, survival, 20-year, mm, invasive, queensland]

Population-Based 20-Year Survival Among People Diagnosed With Thin Melanomas in Queensland, Australia
PURPOSE: The 20-year survival rates are unknown for the majority of melanoma patients-those with thin melanomas. We determined 20-year survival rates of patients diagnosed with thin melanomas (≤ 1.00 mm) in the general population and also determined the main prognostic factors. PATIENTS AND METHODS: Available clinical and histologic data from the Queensland Cancer Registry were obtained for all patients diagnosed with a single thin invasive melanoma from 1982 to 2006 and matched against national death registration data. Melanoma-specific survival estimates to December 31, 2007, were assessed, and subgroup differences in prognosis were determined by fitting multivariate Cox proportional hazard models. RESULTS: Among 26,736 people in the state of Queensland diagnosed with thin melanomas, the 20-year survival was 96%. The most influential determinants of prognosis were tumor thickness ≥ 0.75 mm (adjusted hazard ratio HR, 4.33; 95% CI, 2.8 to 6.8 compared with tumors < 0.25 mm) and patient age at diagnosis older than 65 years (HR, 2.8; 95% CI, 1.8 to 4.5) compared with age younger than 25 years. Acral lentiginous and nodular tumors, male sex, tumor site on the scalp or neck, or tumor invasion of the entire papillary dermis each independently increased the risk of dying from thin invasive melanoma. CONCLUSION: The outlook for patients with thin invasive melanoma is positive, although continued clinical vigilance is warranted for patients with nodular melanoma and those with the thickest tumors.
-------------------------------------

10003265_234 - 0.891675921237 - science
[human, antioxidant, octa, defence, melanocyte, novel, skin, melanogenesis]

2,4,6-Octatrienoic acid is a novel promoter of melanogenesis and antioxidant defence in normal human melanocytes via PPAR-γ activation.
Given the importance of the tanning response in protecting human skin from the harmful effects of UV radiation, one important research priority is to identify novel molecules that are capable of promoting pigmentation and/or antioxidant defence. Parrodienes share some structural features with carotenoids and retinoids, stimulate cell antioxidant defence and counteract senescence-like phenotype in fibroblasts. We selected the parrodiene-derivative 2,4,6-octatrienoic acid (Octa) to study its impact on key parameters of melanogenesis and antioxidant defence in organ-cultured human skin and in normal human melanocytes. Octa promoted melanogenesis by up-regulating tyrosinase and microphthalmia-associated transcription factor expression. This correlated with an increase of melanin content in both human epidermis in situ and cultured human epidermal melanocytes. Moreover, Octa increased the biological antioxidant potential content and the expression and activity of catalase. Activation of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR)-γ was necessary to evoke these effects. These data strongly encourage the systematic study of Octa as a novel candidate promoter of human skin photoprotection.
-------------------------------------

10008687_234 - 0.706869064678 - medicine
[erlotinib, pertuzumab, combination, patient, therapy, week, lung, cancer, her1, study]

A Phase Ib, Dose-Finding Study of Erlotinib in Combination With a Fixed Dose of Pertuzumab in Patients With Advanced Non-Small-Cell Lung Cancer.
BACKGROUND: Pertuzumab, a dimerization inhibitor of human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2), has demonstrated pharmacodynamic activity, with stable disease in non-small-cell lung cancer. Combining erlotinib and pertuzumab may enhance antitumor activity. This study aimed to establish the recommended dosing of the erlotinib and pertuzumab combination; assess safety, preliminary efficacy, and pharmacokinetics; and analyze biomarkers. PATIENTS AND METHODS: Fifteen patients with stage IIIb/IV non-small-cell lung cancer who failed chemotherapy were recruited. The patients received erlotinib (days -8 to -1), then combination therapy (21-day cycles for 6 cycles). Pertuzumab was given intravenous at 840 mg, then 420 mg once every three weeks, with erlotinib given daily (100 or 150 mg). RESULTS: No dose-limiting toxicities were observed. Adverse events were generally grade 1/2 and manageable. The objective response rate was 20% (3/15 patients; 2 responders had mutant HER1, 1 responder had wild-type HER1), median overall progression-free survival was 9.3 weeks. High HER1, HER2, and HER3 messenger RNA expression correlated with increased progression-free survival. Combination therapy did not affect erlotinib's pharmacokinetics; however, pertuzumab mean exposures (maximum concentration, 231 mg/L; area under the concentration-time curve from 0 to 21 days, 1780 mg*d/L) were slightly higher than in previous studies. CONCLUSIONS: Combination therapy was well tolerated in patients with good performance status, with encouraging efficacy. A loading dose of pertuzumab 840 mg followed by 420 mg once every three weeks plus daily erlotinib 150 mg appears to be the most appropriate regimen for this combination.
-------------------------------------

10018377_234 - 0.75453566711 - science
[lung, inflammatory, macrophage, cd200, cd200r, infection, immune, influenza]

A critical function for CD200 in lung immune homeostasis and the severity of influenza infection
The lung must maintain a high threshold of immune 'ignorance' to innocuous antigens to avoid inflammatory disease that depends on the balance of positive inflammatory signals and repressor pathways. We demonstrate here that airway macrophages had higher expression of the negative regulator CD200 receptor (CD200R) than did their systemic counterparts. Lung macrophages were restrained by CD200 expressed on airway epithelium. Mice lacking CD200 had more macrophage activity and enhanced sensitivity to influenza infection, which led to delayed resolution of inflammation and, ultimately, death. The administration of agonists that bind CD200R, however, prevented inflammatory lung disease. Thus, CD200R is critical for lung macrophage immune homeostasis in the resting state and limits inflammatory amplitude and duration during pulmonary influenza infection.
-------------------------------------

10003666_234 - 0.758081966209 - medicine
[nurse, rehabilitation]

The role of the nurse in rehabilitation.
Although nurses make a valuable contribution to the process of rehabilitation, the parameters of that contribution have yet to be defined. This article describes a small study, undertaken on a care of elderly people ward, designed to elicit nurses' understanding of their role in rehabilitation. Interdisciplinary relations and patient care, the authors conclude, would be improved if nurses were taught, and developed the confidence, to implement rehabilitation techniques in practice.
-------------------------------------

10008865_234 - 0.736523273951 - science
[chemical, respiratory, allergen, skin, peptide, reactivity, dpra]

The direct Peptide reactivity assay: selectivity of chemical respiratory allergens.
It is well known that some chemicals are capable of causing allergic diseases of the skin and respiratory tract. Commonly, though not exclusively, chemical allergens are associated with the selective development of skin or respiratory sensitization. The reason for this divergence is unclear, although it is hypothesized that the nature of interactions between the chemical hapten and proteins is influential. The direct peptide reactivity assay (DPRA) has been developed as a screen for the identification of skin-sensitizing chemicals, and here we describe the use of this method to explore whether differences exist between skin and respiratory allergens with respect to their peptide-binding properties. Known skin and respiratory sensitizers were reacted with synthetic peptides containing either lysine (Lys) or cysteine (Cys) for 24h. The samples were analyzed by HPLC/UV, and the loss of peptide from the reaction mixture was expressed as the percent depletion compared with the control. The potential for preferential reactivity was evaluated by comparing the ratio of Lys to Cys depletion (Lys:Cys ratio). The results demonstrate that the majority of respiratory allergens are reactive in the DPRA, and that in contrast to most skin-sensitizing chemicals, preferentially react with the Lys peptide. These data suggest that skin and respiratory chemical allergens can result in different protein conjugates, which may in turn influence the quality of induced immune responses. Overall, these investigations reveal that the DPRA has considerable potential to be incorporated into tiered testing approaches for the identification and characterization of chemical respiratory allergens.
-------------------------------------

10017182_234 - 0.921219606672 - science
[phagocytosis, neutrophil, il-8, conidium, fmlp, increase, chemoattractant]

Stimulation of neutrophil phagocytosis of Aspergillus fumigatus conidia by interleukin-8 and N-formylmethionyl-leucylphenylalanine.
The effect of the chemoattractants, interleukin-8 (IL-8) and N-formylmethionyl-leucylphenylalanine (fmlp) on neutrophil phagocytosis of serum-opsonised Aspergillus fumigatus conidia were studied. Pre-exposure of neutrophil monolayers to IL-8 (10-100 ng ml-1) or fmlp (10(-6)M) for 20 min increased phagocytosis from 15% to 35%. Furthermore, there was a significant increase in the numbers of conidia ingested by active neutrophils. The chemoattractants did not enhance phagocytosis of conidia when added contemporaneously to neutrophil monolayers. The ability of each chemoattractant to act as a primer for the other was investigated. It was found that fmlp could prime for IL-8 and fmlp enhancement of phagocytosis, but IL-8 could not. An increase from 15% to 55% in phagocytosis was seen at a pre-exposure concentration of 10(-5) M fmlp followed by an incubation period of 30 min in the presence of 20 ng ml-1 IL-8. There was no significant increase in the average number of internalized conidia under these conditions. The response of human neutrophils to priming stimuli may have important implications in the pathogenesis of aspergillosis.
-------------------------------------

10009567_234 - 0.807616463922 - science
[rfm, placental, fetal, placenta, structure, woman, function, movement, insufficiency, maternal]

Maternal perception of reduced fetal movements is associated with altered placental structure and function.
BACKGROUND: Maternal perception of reduced fetal movement (RFM) is associated with increased risk of stillbirth and fetal growth restriction (FGR). DFM is thought to represent fetal compensation to conserve energy due to insufficient oxygen and nutrient transfer resulting from placental insufficiency. To date there have been no studies of placental structure in cases of DFM. OBJECTIVE: To determine whether maternal perception of reduced fetal movements (RFM) is associated with abnormalities in placental structure and function. DESIGN: Placentas were collected from women with RFM after 28 weeks gestation if delivery occurred within 1 week. Women with normal movements served as a control group. Placentas were weighed and photographs taken. Microscopic structure was evaluated by immunohistochemical staining and image analysis. System A amino acid transporter activity was measured as a marker of placental function. Placentas from all pregnancies with RFM (irrespective of outcome) had greater area with signs of infarction (3.5% vs. 0.6%; p<0.01), a higher density of syncytial knots (p<0.001) and greater proliferation index (p<0.01). Villous vascularity (p<0.001), trophoblast area (p<0.01) and system A activity (p<0.01) were decreased in placentas from RFM compared to controls irrespective of outcome of pregnancy. CONCLUSIONS: This study provides evidence of abnormal placental morphology and function in women with RFM and supports the proposition of a causal association between placental insufficiency and RFM. This suggests that women presenting with RFM require further investigation to identify those with placental insufficiency.
-------------------------------------

10009524_234 - 0.721442890445 - technology_and_computing
[communication, processor, spinnaker, model, network, architecture, platform, neural, performance, hardware]

Scalable communications for a million-core neural processing architecture
The design of a new high-performance computing platform to model biological neural networks requires scalable, layered communications in both hardware and software. SpiNNaker???s hardware is based upon Multi-Processor System-on-Chips (MPSoCs) with flexible, power-efficient, custom communication between processors and chips. The architecture scales from a single 18-processor chip to over 1 million processors and to simulations of billion-neuron, trillion-synapse models, with tens of trillions of neural spike-event packets conveyed each second. The communication networks and overlying protocols are key to the successful operation of the SpiNNaker architecture, designed together to maximise performance and minimise the power demands of the platform. SpiNNaker is a work in progress, having recently reached a major milestone with the delivery of the first MPSoCs. This paper presents the architectural justification, which is now supported by preliminary measured results of silicon performance, indicating that it is indeed scalable to a million-plus processor system.
-------------------------------------

10011024_234 - 0.74844291598 - science
[impacted, behaviour, strontium, nitrate, precipitation, bioreduction, sorption, sediment]

Strontium sorption and precipitation behaviour during bioreduction in nitrate impacted sediments
cited By (since 1996) 1
-------------------------------------

10008099_234 - 0.838018945568 - science
[glucose, concentration, placental, culture, assay, structure, function]

A high-throughput colorimetric-assay for monitoring glucose consumption by cultured trophoblast cells and placental tissue.
Diabetes mellitus is associated with abnormalities in placental structure and function and significant pregnancy complications. In vitro studies to investigate the effect of hyperglycaemia on trophoblast structure and function require an accurate, inexpensive and reliable assay to monitor the concentration of glucose in culture medium. We have modified and validated an existing protocol for use with a 96-well microplate. This provides a specific, high-throughput assay which accurately measures culture media glucose concentrations between 7 and 30 mM, without spectral interferences by phenol red or sera. Use of this assay revealed that the concentration of glucose in BeWo cell cultures remains stable for 48 h. In contrast placental explants rapidly consume glucose thus the concentration in culture media significantly decreases over 12 h necessitating more frequent replenishment in order to maintain the desired concentration. We therefore advise researchers to monitor glucose concentrations in in vitro investigations modelling the effect of diabetes mellitus on placental structure and function.
-------------------------------------

10009745_234 - 0.844642307795 - science
[oricult-n, vaginal, yeast, method, control, group]

Evaluation of the Oricult-N dipslide for laboratory diagnosis of vaginal candidiasis.
The Oricult-N semiquantitative dipslide (Orion Diagnostica, Espoo, Finland) was evaluated for the laboratory diagnosis of vaginal candidiasis. It was compared with broth culture (Vagicult; Orion Diagnostica). Oricult-N was positive for 14.5% of 124 symptomatic patients and 12% of 50 asymptomatic controls. The results for broth cultures were 17 and 22%, respectively. Thus, the test group and the control group did not differ significantly by either method. High vaginal yeast counts (>/=10(5) CFU/ml) were detected by Oricult-N in 7% of patients and in 0% of controls, but both groups harbored low numbers of yeasts. An accurate quantitative cutoff point separating a level of yeast associated with infection from vaginal yeast carriage could not be defined in the study. Nevertheless, the easy semiquantitation allowed by the Oricult-N method could be helpful because, especially in low-count carriers of Candida, other potential causes of vaginal symptoms should be considered. The Oricult-N method was technically simple and could be applied in primary health care. Further studies are required, however, before Oricult-N can be recommended as a routine diagnostic tool.
-------------------------------------

10012728_234 - 0.921704030765 - science
[diffraction, reaction, hydrothermal, phase, synchrotron, study, cement, synthesis, dispersive, kinetics]

Hydrothermal synthesis of cement phases: An in situ synchrotron, energy dispersive diffraction study of reaction kinetics and mechanisms
cited By (since 1996) 1
-------------------------------------

10005295_234 - 0.909406016523 - science
[concentration, fibrinogen, thrombin, fibrin, clot, rigidity, phase, salt, blood, sample]

Rheological Properties of Fibrin Clots
A study of the rheological properties of fibrin, an important coagulant in human haemostasis, is presented in this MPhil thesis. Fibrin monomers are activated at the site of an injury to a blood vessel through the thrombin-induced cleavage of fibrinogen, a protein which circulates in the blood. These monomers self-assemble into networks by branching out and connecting with each other. This is the process which gives rise to a blood clot. There are a variety of factors which have an influence on the structure of the fibrin network, which in turn have an influence on the physical properties of the clot. The influence of two of these factors, fibrinogen concentration and thrombin concentration, is investigated in this paper. The motivation for this work is the need to determine what makes a perfect blood clot, and to find out if increasing the concentration of fibrinogen or thrombin increases the long-term stability of clots. Previous research has highlighted some of the remarkable rheological properties of this material, namely by frequency-dependent experiments. In this work frequency-independent measurements of the time evolution of fibrin clot rigidity, and how this is related to the concentration of thrombin and fibrinogen, are presented. Measurements were taken using a Bohlin Gemini HR Nano Rheometer over a period of 16 hours. Samples were prepared with Tris-EDTA buffer, both with the addition of salt and without, either with a fixed concentration of thrombin and varying fibrinogen, or with a fixed concentration of fibrinogen and varying thrombin. It was found that the time evolution of the rigidity exhibited three separate phases, characterised by a steady increase in rigidity, followed by a sharp increase, and ending with a plateau, during which rigidity ceased to increase. Samples prepared with a higher concentration of thrombin or fibrinogen exhibited an increase in rigidity in the first phase, but this behaviour is not observed after the first phase. Consistent with previous research, it was determined that the clotting time of fibrin decreases with increasing concentration of thrombin or fibrinogen. This effect is also observed when salt is added to the Tris-EDTA buffer. The addition of salt was also found to have an effect on the long-term stability of clots, as the rigidity of samples prepared with salt experienced a sharp decline in the third phase. This can be related to the structure of fibrin, and the findings in this work can be used to help increase our understanding of how to make a perfect clot.
-------------------------------------

10011274_234 - 0.759602330448 - technology_and_computing
[mode, beam, diagnostic, dipole, cavity, harmonic, hom, modal]

A study of beam position diagnostics using beam-excited dipole modes in third harmonic superconducting accelerating cavities at a free-electron laser
We investigate the feasibility of beam position diagnostics using higher order mode (HOM) signals excited by an electron beam in the third harmonic 3.9 GHz superconducting accelerating cavities at FLASH. After careful theoretical and experimental assessment of the HOM spectrum, three modal choices have been narrowed down to fulfill different diagnostics requirements. These are localized dipole beam-pipe modes, trapped cavity modes from the fifth dipole band, and propagating modes from the first two dipole bands. These modes are treated with various data analysis techniques: modal identification, direct linear regression (DLR), and singular value decomposition (SVD). Promising options for beam diagnostics are found from all three modal choices. This constitutes the first prediction, subsequently confirmed by experiments, of trapped HOMs in third harmonic cavities, and also the first direct comparison of DLR and SVD in the analysis of HOM-based beam diagnostics
-------------------------------------

10012735_234 - 0.937168436678 - science
[hsd7, reductase, 3-ketosteroid, dehydrogenase]

17beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 7 - An ancient 3-ketosteroid reductase of cholesterogenesis
17??-hydroxysterold dehydrogenase type 7 (17??-HSD7) is a novel estrogenic hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase from mammals. We modeled the three-dimensional structure of human 17??-HSD7, analyzed the phylogeny of 17??-HSD7 homologues and determined its expression pattern by in silico Northern blotting. Predominant expression is found not only in reproductive tissues (breast, ovary, placenta) but also in liver and developing brain, principal sites of cholesterol synthesis. The substrate binding pocket is opening towards a conserved membrane-associated helix, which is indicative for a conversion of a membrane component. 17??-HSD7 shows significant homology to a yeast 3-ketosteroid reductase (ERG27) involved in ergosterol biosynthesis. Our results lead to the conclusion that 17??-HSD7 is not only involved in estradiol production but plays another (and possibly more important) role as a 3-ketosteroid reductase in cholesterogenesis. This agrees with the striking absence of 17??-HSD7 homologues in the complete genomes of Drosophila and C. elegans which are both auxotrophic for cholesterol. Copyright ?? 2001 Elsevier Science Ireland Ltd.
-------------------------------------

10007490_234 - 0.876593714783 - medicine
[patient, arm, nonsquamous, motesanib, month, nsclc, adenocarcinoma, subset, advanced, median]

International, randomized, placebo-controlled, double-blind phase III study of motesanib plus carboplatin/paclitaxel in patients with advanced nonsquamous non-small-cell lung cancer: MONET1.
PURPOSE: We evaluated whether motesanib (a selective oral inhibitor of vascular endothelial growth factor receptors 1, 2, and 3; platelet-derived growth factor receptor; and Kit) combined with carboplatin/paclitaxel improved overall survival (OS) versus chemotherapy alone in patients with nonsquamous non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) and in the subset of patients with adenocarcinoma. PATIENTS AND METHODS: Patients with stage IIIB/IV or recurrent nonsquamous NSCLC (no prior systemic therapy for advanced disease) were randomly assigned 1:1 to carboplatin (area under the curve, 6 mg/ml · min) and paclitaxel (200 mg/m(2)) intravenously for up to six 3-week cycles plus either motesanib 125 mg (arm A) or placebo (arm B) once daily orally. OS was the primary end point. Secondary end points included progression-free survival (PFS), objective response rate (ORR), adverse events (AEs), and association between placental growth factor (PLGF) change and OS. RESULTS: A total of 1,090 patients with nonsquamous NSCLC were randomly assigned (arms A/B, n = 541 of 549); of those, 890 had adenocarcinoma (n = 448 of 442). Median OS in arms A and B was 13.0 and 11.0 months, respectively (hazard ratio HR, 0.90; 95% CI, 0.78 to 1.04; P = .14); median OS for the adenocarcinoma subset was 13.5 and 11.0 months, respectively (HR, 0.88; 95% CI, 0.75 to 1.03; P = .11). In descriptive analyses (arms A v B), median PFS was 5.6 months versus 5.4 months (P = < .001); ORR was 40% versus 26% (P < .001). There was no association between PLGF change and OS in arm A. The incidence of grade ≥ 3 AEs (arms A and B, 73% and 59%, respectively) and grade 5 AEs (14% and 9%, respectively) was higher with motesanib treatment. CONCLUSION: Motesanib plus carboplatin/paclitaxel did not significantly improve OS over carboplatin/paclitaxel alone in patients with advanced nonsquamous NSCLC or in the adenocarcinoma subset.
-------------------------------------

10017026_234 - 0.876603913365 - medicine
[treatment, dementia]

Dimebolin in dementia.
The treatment options for Alzheimer's type dementia are limited to the use of acetyl-cholinesterase inhibitors, along with memantine in some cases, and offer variable success in the treatment of cognitive impairment and to improve or stabilize activities of daily living, behavioral abnormalities, and impairment of global function. This review examines dimebolin, a nonselective antihistamine drug that has been used in Russia in the past for its antihistamine effect and has now generated considerable interest in the treatment of Alzheimer's type dementia, following results in the initial trials (Doody et al., 2008) and is currently under further evaluation. This article considers various theories proposed to explain its effect in the treatment of dementia. The results from further trials will help to clarify the future of dimebolin as a potential treatment for chronic neurodegenerative disorders that include dementia that affects 25 million people worldwide.
-------------------------------------

10014522_234 - 0.912694991947 - science
[exciton]

Systematic reduction of the permanent exciton dipole for charged excitons in individual self-assembled InGaAs quantum dots
Times Cited: 1 11th International Conference on Modulated Semiconductor Structures (MSS11) JUL 14-18, 2003 Nara, JAPAN
-------------------------------------

10009968_234 - 0.76323386767 - food_and_drink
[dose, ketoconazole, food, concentration, serum]

Influence of food on the pharmacokinetics of ketoconazole.
Eight healthy adults were given single oral doses of ketoconazole (200, 400, 600, and 800 mg) in the fasting state and with a standard breakfast at weekly intervals according to a balanced block design. Concentrations in serum were measured up to 32 h after the dose. Food did not reduce ketoconazole absorption or significantly alter peak ketoconazole concentrations in serum, though there was a food-related delay in achieving peak concentrations. At the 400- and 600-mg doses, food appeared to enhance absorption, but this effect was not seen at the 800-mg dose. With an increase in dose, the half-life and area under the serum concentration-time curve increased disproportionately, suggesting that the pharmacokinetics of ketoconazole may be dose dependent. Up to the 800-mg dose, the elimination of ketoconazole did not appear to be saturable. Administration of the drug with food is unlikely to be a cause of therapeutic failure.
-------------------------------------

10005547_234 - 0.888129536398 - science
[difference, lymphocyte, crohn, transformation, antigen, disease, specific]

Lymphocyte transformation to specific antigens associated with Crohn's disease.
Specific lymphocyte transformation to three micro-organisms that have been implicated in Crohn's disease was performed. These were Pseudomonas maltophilia, Mycobacterium kansasii and Rotavirus. No significant differences were observed for any of the antigens tested. Simultaneous testing of nonspecific stimulation by PHA also showed no difference between patients and controls. These results do not support an aetiological role for these organisms mediated by a purely cellular mechanism.
-------------------------------------

10010288_234 - 0.797171712466 - science
[inhibitor, aromatase, response, metastatic, patient, cancer, polymorphism, cyp19a1, breast]

Polymorphisms of CYP19A1 and response to aromatase inhibitors in metastatic breast cancer patients
IF 2010 4.859
-------------------------------------

10011089_234 - 0.841482087335 - science
[carbonate, acc, calcite, amorphous, mechanism, vaterite, calcium, kinetics, crystallization]

The kinetics and mechanisms of amorphous calcium carbonate (ACC) crystallization to calcite, via vaterite
cited By (since 1996) 22
-------------------------------------

10005453_234 - 0.869823734083 - science
[hair, matrix, human, property, hydrophobic, modification, effect]

The effects of hydrophobic modifications on the interaction of human hair with water
Human hair, like other α-keratinous fibres, is a highly complex biomaterial. For the analysis of its mechanical properties it is, however, well described by a two-phase structure, which contains as morphological components the highly-ordered, crystalline intermediate filaments (IFs) and the less-ordered, amorphous matrix. The presence of elastic IFs alongside the viscous matrix, results in the viscoelastic properties exhibited by human hair.
Previous studies have shown that wool has a higher glass transition temperature, Tg, than human hair despite a higher content of the hydrophobic, high glycine-tyrosine (HGT) proteins contained within the matrix. On this basis the ‘internal plasticization hypothesis’ was developed, stating that the HGT-proteins in hair have a specific plasticization effect in the matrix. To investigate this hypothesis, hydrophobic modifications of the matrix proteins have been carried out and their effects on the thermal properties of the hair analysed. During the first stage of the investigations it was shown that, hydrophobic modifications by esterification lead to substantial changes of the humidity-dependent glass transition of human hair.
The disulphide linkages, which are predominantly located in the matrix, play an important role for the stability of a hair fibre. In this work, the disulphide linkages have been reduced and subsequently methylated and both the thermal and mechanical properties analysed. First results are reported for this second stage of the investigations.
-------------------------------------

10005626_234 - 0.722408628489 - science
[hypnosis, motility, colonic, effect, rate, emotion, physiological, change]

Physiological effects of emotion: assessment via hypnosis.
Assessment of the physiological effects of physical and emotional stress has been hampered by a lack of suitable laboratory techniques. Since hypnosis can be used safely to induce specific emotional states of considerable intensity, we studied the effect on distal colonic motility of three hypnotically induced emotions (excitement, anger, and happiness) in 18 patients aged 20-48 years with irritable bowel syndrome. Colonic motility index was reduced by hypnosis on its own (mean change 19.1; 95% CI 0.8, 37.3; p less than 0.05) and this change was accompanied by decreases in both pulse (12; 8, 15) and respiration (6; 4, 8) rates (p less than 0.001 for both). Anger and excitement increased the colonic motility index (50.8; 29.4, 72.2; and 30.4; 8.9, 51.9, respectively; p less than 0.01 for both), pulse rate (26; 22, 30; and 28; 24, 32; p less than 0.001 for both), and respiration rate (14; 12, 16; and 12; 10, 14; p less than 0.001 for both). Happiness further reduced colonic motility although not significantly from that observed during hypnosis alone. Changes in motility were mainly due to alterations in rate than in amplitude of contractions. Our results indicate that hypnosis may help in the investigation of the effects of emotion on physiological functions; this approach could be useful outside the gastrointestinal system. Our observation that hypnosis strikingly reduces fasting colonic motility may partly explain the beneficial effects of this form of therapy in functional bowel disorders.
-------------------------------------

10007012_234 - 0.769531786236 - science
[aerosol, equilibrium, partitioning, gas-aerosol, model, nitrate, ammonium, altitude]

Modelling the partitioning of ammonium nitrate in the convective boundary layer
An explanatory model study is presented on semi-volatile secondary inorganic aerosols on three clear days in May 2008 during the IMPACT campaign at the Cabauw tower in the Netherlands. A single column model in combination with the equilibrium aerosol model ISORROPIA is used. This model uses surface observations from IMPACT and calculates the gas-aerosol partitioning of ammonium nitrate. The calculated gas-aerosol equilibrium overestimates the gas phase fraction during daytime, and overestimates the aerosol phase fraction during night-time. This discrepancy can partly be solved when the approach of the gas-aerosol equilibrium is forced to proceed with a delay timescale of up to two hours. Although it is shown that the delay itself has a small effect, the most important effect is caused by the mixing of air from higher altitudes at which the equilibrium is shifted to the aerosol phase. Thus, vertical mixing is shown to have a significant influence on the calculated partitioning at the surface. On some occasions, the correspondence to the observed partitioning improves dramatically. </br > Even though gas-aerosol partitioning of ammonium nitrate is not instantaneous, observations show that a different equilibrium in the upper boundary layer causes aerosol ammonium nitrate concentrations to increase with altitude. Our model calculates similar vertical gradients depending on the assumed speed of gas-aerosol equilibrium. The calculated optical properties of the aerosol show a similar behaviour. The aerosol optical properties depend on the aerosol size distribution both directly, because light scattering depends on particle size, and indirectly, because the equilibration timescale depends on the aerosol sizes. Future studies should therefore focus on a fully size-resolved treatment of the gas-aerosol partitioning. </br > Finally, coarser-resolution models may treat the gas-aerosol equilibrium of ammonium nitrate by calculating the equilibrium with a temperature and humidity sampled at a different altitude. We found that the equilibrium at an altitude of 200 m (night) up to 600 m (day) is representative for the partitioning of ammonium nitrate at the surface in the beginning of May 2008.
-------------------------------------

10017171_234 - 0.921512875243 - science
[psidin, olfactory, neuron, formation, number, axon, circuit, defect, natb, dnaa20]

Drosophila Psidin regulates olfactory neuron number and axon targeting through two distinct molecular mechanisms
The formation of neuronal circuits is a key process of development, laying foundations for behavior. The cellular mechanisms regulating circuit development are not fully understood. Here, we reveal Psidin as an intracellular regulator of Drosophila olfactory system formation. We show that Psidin is required in several classes of olfactory receptor neurons (ORNs) for survival and subsequently for axon guidance. During axon guidance, Psidin functions as an actin regulator and antagonist of Tropomyosin. Accordingly, Psidin-deficient primary neurons in culture display growth cones with significantly smaller lamellipodia. This lamellipodial phenotype as well as the mistargeting defects in vivo are suppressed by parallel removal of Tropomyosin. In contrast, Psidin functions as the non-catalytic subunit of the N-acetyltransferase complex NatB to maintain the number of ORNs. Psidin physically binds the catalytic NatB subunit CG14222 (dNAA20) and functionally interacts with it in vivo. We define the dNAA20 interaction domain within Psidin and identify a conserved serine as a candidate for phosphorylation-mediated regulation of NatB complex formation. A phosphomimetic mutation of this serine showed severely reduced binding to dNAA20 in vitro. In vivo, it fully rescued the targeting defect, but not the reduction in neuron numbers. In addition, we show that a different amino acid point mutation shows exactly the opposite effect by rescuing only the cell number but not the axon targeting defect. Taken together, our data suggest that Psidin plays two independent developmental roles via the acquisition of separate signaling pathways both of which contribute to the formation of olfactory circuits.

PubMed: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23152593
-------------------------------------

10006930_234 - 0.811239594707 - science
[light, photoreceptor, retinal, clock, response, melanopsin, iprgc]

How rod, cone, and melanopsin photoreceptors come together to enlighten the mammalian circadian clock.
In mammals, a small number of retinal ganglion cells express melanopsin, an opsin photopigment, allowing them to be directly photoreceptive. A major function of these so-called intrinsically photosensitive retinal ganglion cells (ipRGCs) is to synchronize (entrain) endogenous circadian clocks to the external light:dark cycle. Thanks to their intrinsic light response, ipRGCs can support photoentrainment even when the other retinal photoreceptors (rods and cones) are absent or inactive. However, in the intact retina the ipRGC light response is a composite of extrinsic (rod/cone) and intrinsic (melanopsin) influences. As a result all three photoreceptor classes contribute to the retinal pathways providing light information to the clock. Here, we consider what each photoreceptor type contributes to the clock light response. We review electrophysiological and behavioral data pertinent to this question, primarily from laboratory rodents, drawing them together to provide a conceptual model in which each photoreceptor class plays a distinct role in encoding the light environment. We finally use this model to highlight some of the important outstanding questions in this field.
-------------------------------------

10018366_234 - 0.881743544659 - science
[cell, eosinophilia, ox40, ox40l, neoforman]

OX40 ligation on activated T cells enhances the control of Cryptococcus neoformans and reduces pulmonary eosinophilia.
Pulmonary eosinophilia induced in C57BL/6 mice after Cryptococcus neoformans infection is driven by CD4(+) Th2 cells. The immunological mechanisms that protect against eosinophilia are not fully understood. Interaction of OX40 (CD134) and its ligand, OX40L, has been implicated in T cell activation and cell migration. Unlike CD28, OX40 is only expressed on T cells 1-2 days after Ag activation. Manipulation of this pathway would therefore target recently activated T cells, leaving the naive repertoire unaffected. In this study, we show that engagement of OX40 by an OX40L:Ig fusion protein drives IFN-gamma production by CD4(+) T cells and reduces eosinophilia and C. neoformans burden in the lung. Using gene-depleted mice, we show that reduction of eosinophilia and pathogen burden requires IL-12 and/or IFN-gamma. C. neoformans infection itself only partially induces OX40L expression by APCs. Provision of exogenous OX40L reveals a critical role of this pathway in the prevention of C. neoformans-induced eosinophilia.
-------------------------------------

10009815_234 - 0.925576609873 - science
[neutrophil, intracellular, phagocytosis, gm-csf, albican, cell]

Enhanced phagocytosis and intracellular killing of Candida albicans by GM-CSF-activated human neutrophils.
Little is known about effector cell modulation regarding phagocytosis and candidacidal activities of human neutrophils in response to granulocyte-macrophage colony stimulating factor (GM-CSF). In neutrophil monolayer assays, pre-treatment of cells with ultrapure GM-CSF at 40 Units ml-1 for a minimum of 1 h showed a significant enhancement of phagocytosis of Candida albicans (phagocytic index of 2.6 compared with 1.6 for unactivated neutrophils) after a 20 min ingestion period (P < 0.001). By counting viable colonies 50% of intracellular yeast cells were killed by non-activated neutrophils following internalization for 2 h. Neutrophils activated for 2 h with 40 Units ml-1 of GM-CSF killed 90% of intracellular blastoconidia (P < 0.02). These results demonstrate that in in vitro assays GM-CSF enhances phagocytosis and intracellular killing of C. albicans.
-------------------------------------

10008604_234 - 0.749298503456 - science
[ige, assay, method, allergen-specific, allergen, detection]

Detection of Allergen-Specific IgE Antibody Responses.
Allergen-specific IgE production is the central event in the pathogenesis of atopic disorders and increases in specific IgE serum antibodies are an indicator of immediate hypersensitivity responses in humans and in animal models of allergy. Consequently, accurate and user-friendly methods are needed to measure serum levels of allergen-specific IgE. This review examines historical and recent developments in in vivo and in vitro methods for the detection of allergen-specific IgE in humans and in animal models. Routinely, in vitro methods such as enzyme-linked immunosorbant assays or radioallergosorbant tests and in vivo methods such as the skin prick test (SPT) for humans and the passive cutaneous anaphylaxis assay (PCA) used in animals are utilized to detect allergen-specific IgE. While in vivo assays are usually more accurate than in vitro assays since they provide a functional readout of IgE activity, they are relatively costly and require considerable expertise. On the other hand in vitro assays are limited by the fact that the amount of allergen-specific serum IgG exceeds IgE antibody by several orders of magnitude, resulting in competition for allergen binding. Consequently, methods that use allergen as a direct capture step are limited by the availability of free allergen binding sites for IgE. In order to circumvent this problem, in vitro methods usually require prior depletion of IgG or use high amounts of allergen in order to facilitate availability of free binding sites for IgE detection. Clearly, these approaches are limited for small sample volumes and allergens that are in short supply. New methods such as protein microarray could potentially overcome this problem by providing high allergen concentrations in a relatively small reaction volume. Currently, in vitro methods are rarely used in isolation for prognosis but are used primarily to complement the information obtained from in vivo assays. With the emergence of new technologies it is conceivable that in vitro assays may in the future replace in vivo assays, however until then in vivo assays remain the gold standard of allergen-specific IgE detection.
-------------------------------------

10005266_234 - 0.795143872474 - science
[collagen, keloid, site, passage, fibroblast, cell, extralesional, tissue, scar, level]

Fibroblasts from the growing margin of keloid scars produce higher levels of collagen I and III compared with intralesional and extralesional sites: clinical implications for lesional site-directed therapy.
BACKGROUND: Overproduction of collagen and its abnormal assembly are hallmarks of keloid scars. Type I/III collagen ratios are altered in keloids compared with normal skin. Fibroblasts from different sites in keloid tissue, perilesional compared with intralesional and extralesional sites, show differential apoptosis and contraction. Additionally, early vs. later cell culture passages display differential collagen expression. We therefore hypothesize that keloid fibroblasts from the growing margin of the keloid express higher levels of collagen type I and III, and that collagen production is altered by extended cell culture passage. OBJECTIVES: (i) To measure collagen I and III at mRNA and protein levels quantitatively in keloid fibroblasts, growth media and tissue sections; and (ii) to perform tissue staining for collagen I and III expression in different lesional sites. METHODS: Keloid fibroblast cultures from intralesional, perilesional and extralesional sites (n = 8 separate keloid cases, yielding 64 biopsy samples) were established from passage 0 to passage 3. Collagen I and III mRNA was quantified using quantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction. We also measured the protein levels quantitatively by developing a highly specific and sensitive capture sandwich enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. A novel in-cell Western blotting was carried out in addition to haematoxylin and eosin and Herovici staining on keloid tissue sections for collagen I and III. RESULTS: Collagen types I and III were significantly higher (P < 0·03) in fibroblasts from the growing margin (perilesional site) compared with extralesional and intralesional keloid biopsy sites. As the passage number increased, the amount of collagen I significantly (P < 0·05) decreased and the collagen I/III ratio also decreased. CONCLUSIONS: Our data show that cells from the growing margin of keloid scars have a higher production of collagen I and III compared with other lesional sites. Additionally, temporal extension of cell passage affects collagen production. Clinically these findings may influence selection and interpretation of extended cell passage and provide future direction for lesional site-specific therapy in keloid scars.
-------------------------------------

10007866_234 - 0.729475545197 - medicine
[vandetanib, vc, gc, patient]

A phase I study of Vandetanib in combination with vinorelbine/cisplatin or gemcitabine/cisplatin as first-line treatment for advanced non-small cell lung cancer.
INTRODUCTION: Vandetanib is a once-daily oral agent that selectively inhibits vascular endothelial growth factor receptor, epidermal growth factor receptor, and RET (REarranged during Transfection) signaling. METHODS: This Phase I study investigated the safety, tolerability, and pharmacokinetics of vandetanib when administered with either gemcitabine plus cisplatin (GC) or vinorelbine plus cisplatin (VC) in patients with previously untreated locally advanced or metastatic non-small cell lung cancer. RESULTS: Seventeen patients received vandetanib 100 mg/d plus VC (n = 9) or GC (n = 8). Three dose-limiting toxicities were reported in each treatment group: vandetanib + VC (pulmonary artery thrombosis and asymptomatic QTc prolongation n = 2); vandetanib + GC (peripheral ischemia due to arterial occlusion, pulmonary embolism, and limb venous thrombosis). The protocol definition of a tolerable dose was not met, and no patients were recruited to receive vandetanib 300 mg plus VC or GC. There was no apparent pharmacokinetic interaction between vandetanib and vinorelbine or gemcitabine, but there was an approximate 30% increase in the exposure to cisplatin, which may be due to accumulation of total platinum and/or an interaction with vandetanib. CONCLUSIONS: In this study, in patients with previously untreated advanced non-small cell lung cancer, vandetanib 100 mg/d in combination with either VC or GC was not tolerated.
-------------------------------------

10007584_234 - 0.822222508302 - science
[times, millimetric, intensity, concordia, emission, dome, atmospheric, cited, wavelength, polarization]

Intensity and polarization of the atmospheric emission at millimetric wavelengths at Dome Concordia
Times Cited: 1
-------------------------------------

10005637_234 - 0.749987886874 - medicine
[bowel, irritable, syndrome, ondansetron]

Selective 5-hydroxytryptamine antagonism: a role in irritable bowel syndrome and functional dyspepsia?
BACKGROUND: Abnormalities of gut motility and visceral pain perception are both thought to be involved in the pathogenesis of irritable bowel syndrome and may be susceptible to modulation by drugs affecting the various 5-HT receptor subtypes. The aim of this study was to investigate the therapeutic potential of a 5-HT3 antagonist in irritable bowel syndrome. METHODS: Fifty patients with irritable bowel syndrome were treated with ondansetron, a highly selective 5-HT3 antagonist, in a double-blind, placebo-controlled cross-over study. In addition to assessing its effect on the classical symptoms of irritable bowel syndrome (abdominal pain, distension and disordered bowel habit) its effect on symptoms often seen in irritable bowel syndrome, but more commonly associated with functional dyspepsia, was also examined. RESULTS: Ondansetron reduced bowel frequency (P = 0.035) and improved stool consistency (P = 0.002) in diarrhoea predominant irritable bowel syndrome and did not cause a deterioration of bowel habit in constipation predominant subjects. No statistically significant improvement was seen for abdominal pain or distension, although those patients who did respond were approximately twice as likely to be taking ondansetron than placebo. It was also found that ondansetron significantly improved the upper gastrointestinal symptoms of post-prandial epigastric discomfort (P = 0.008), flatulence (P = 0.022) and heartburn (P = 0.003). CONCLUSION: The results of this study justify evaluation of the therapeutic potential of selective 5-HT antagonists in both functional dyspepsia and irritable bowel syndrome.
-------------------------------------

10006929_234 - 0.816375349783 - science
[opsin, optogenetic, jellyop, tool, rod, light]

Reproducible and sustained regulation of Gαs signalling using a metazoan opsin as an optogenetic tool.
Originally developed to regulate neuronal excitability, optogenetics is increasingly also used to control other cellular processes with unprecedented spatiotemporal resolution. Optogenetic modulation of all major G-protein signalling pathways (Gq, Gi and Gs) has been achieved using variants of mammalian rod opsin. We show here that the light response driven by such rod opsin-based tools dissipates under repeated exposure, consistent with the known bleaching characteristics of this photopigment. We continue to show that replacing rod opsin with a bleach resistant opsin from Carybdea rastonii, the box jellyfish, (JellyOp) overcomes this limitation. Visible light induced high amplitude, reversible, and reproducible increases in cAMP in mammalian cells expressing JellyOp. While single flashes produced a brief cAMP spike, repeated stimulation could sustain elevated levels for 10s of minutes. JellyOp was more photosensitive than currently available optogenetic tools, responding to white light at irradiances ≥1 µW/cm(2). We conclude that JellyOp is a promising new tool for mimicking the activity of Gs-coupled G protein coupled receptors with fine spatiotemporal resolution.
-------------------------------------

10005509_234 - 0.733789878135 - medicine
[doctor, practice, hour, drug, patient]

Comparison of out of hours care provided by patients' own general practitioners and commercial deputising services: a randomised controlled trial. I: The process of care.
OBJECTIVE: To compare the process of out of hours care provided by general practitioners from patients' own practices and by commercial deputising services. DESIGN: Randomised controlled trial. SETTING: Four urban areas in Manchester, Salford, Stockport, and Leicester. SUBJECTS: 2152 patients who requested out of hours care, and 49 practice doctors and 183 deputising doctors (61% local principals) who responded to those requests. MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Response to call, time to visit, prescribing, and hospital admissions. RESULTS: 1046 calls were dealt with by practice doctors and 1106 by deputising doctors. Practice doctors were more likely to give telephone advice (20.2% v 0.72% of calls) and to visit more quickly than deputising doctors (median delay 35 minutes v 52 minutes). Practice doctors were less likely than deputising doctors to issue a prescription (56.1% v 63.2% of patients) or to prescribe an antibiotic (43.7% v 61.3% of prescriptions issued) and more likely to prescribe genetic drugs (58.4% v 32.1% of drugs prescribed), cheaper drugs (mean cost per prescription pounds 3.28 v pounds 5.04), and drugs in a predefined out of hours formulary (49.8% v 41.1% of drugs prescribed). There was no significant difference in the number of hospital admissions. CONCLUSIONS: By contrast with practice doctors, deputising doctors providing out of hours care less readily give telephone advice, take longer to visit at home, and have patterns of prescribing that may be less discriminating.
-------------------------------------

10005606_234 - 0.744168885883 - medicine
[amiodarone, overdose]

Amiodarone overdose and its management.
A patient taking an overdose of 3.4 g of amiodarone is described. Consciousness and physical examination remained normal throughout. Continuous electrocardiographic monitoring for 48 hours after admission revealed only a self-limiting episode of ventricular tachycardia, despite high serum levels of the drug (serum desethylamiodarone levels 4.4 mg/l). The pharmacokinetic properties of amiodarone and treatment strategies for the overdose situation are discussed. It is suggested that there may be a role for the use of cholestyramine in the treatment of both acute and chronic amiodarone toxicity.
-------------------------------------

10004152_234 - 0.718649303788 - society
[suicide, behaviour, psychosis]

Cognitive Behavioural Prevention of Suicide in Psychosis: A Treatment Manual
This practical and informative text lays out the product of a number of years of clinical research into suicide behaviour and its prevention. While the focus is on non-affective psychosis and the schizophrenia-spectrum disorders, the mechanisms underlying suicide behaviour in this group may well underlie or at least influence suicide behaviour in other disorders. The authors describe methods of assessment through individual formulation, and a cognitive behavioural intervention through case studies, to reduce the risk of suicide.This book argues that:· Suicide behaviour lies on a cognitive-behavioural continuum from ideation, through intention to action. · Mechanisms based on biased information processing systems, the development of suicide schema, and appraisal styles are likely to be fruitful in explaining suicidal thoughts and behaviours.· A psychological theory of suicide behaviour is needed in order to develop a mechanism of suicide and to understand the components of suicidal thoughts and behaviours.· Suicide risk can be reduced through the use of the intervention methods described within the text Cognitive Behavioural Prevention of Suicide in Psychosis evaluates practical applications of contemporary research on this topic, and will therefore be of interest to practitioners, post-graduates in training, and researchers studying suicide and/or psychosis.
-------------------------------------

10014432_234 - 0.801898837755 - science
[candida, pcr, sample, spp, granuloma, occurrence, periapical, albican, product, dna]

Examination on Candida spp. in refractory periapical granulomas.
AIM: To examine the occurrence of Candida spp. in refractory periapical granulomas. METHODOLOGY: One hundred and three surgically removed periapical granulomas were subjected to molecular analysis for the occurrence of Candida albicans. DNA was extracted from the samples using a modified phenol/chloroform/isoamyl alcohol method and was subjected to polymerase chain reaction (PCR) with OPA-03 and repetitive sequence (GACA)4 primers. The PCR products were separated in agarose gel electrophoresis, stained with ethidium bromide, visualized using UV light and the sequences were analysed. Samples indicating possible occurrence of Candida were further investigated by histological and immunohistological methods. Periodic acid-Shiff staining (PAS) was used to detect yeast cells and hyphae, and specific monoclonal antibodies to recognize high molecular mass mannoproteins present in the C. albicans cell wall. DNA extraction was controlled by running PCR using beta-actin primers (a housekeeping gene). C. albicans CCUG19915, C. tropicalis ATCC750, C. krusei ATCC6258, C. guilliermondii ATCC6260 and C. glabrata CCUG32725 served as positive controls in PCR. A tissue preparation of chronic atrophic candidosis in oral buccal mucosa served as a positive control for histological and immunohistological examinations. RESULTS: Polymerase chain reaction with beta-actin primers indicated successful DNA extraction in 68 out of 103 samples. The majority of the samples (50) were negative whereas 18 of the samples showed PCR products indicating possible occurrence of Candida spp. PAS-staining and immunohistological examination of these samples were, however, negative. Further analysis of the PCR products revealed sequences not typical for Candida spp. CONCLUSIONS: Candida spp. do not seem to occur in periapical granuloma.
-------------------------------------

10015755_234 - 0.777147580637 - science
[neurodevelopmental, brain, process, evidence, illness, transition, early, structural, factor, imaging]

Structural brain imaging evidence for multiple pathological processes at different stages of brain development in schizophrenia.
The underlying neurobiology of emerging psychotic disorders is not well understood. While there is evidence from structural imaging and other studies supporting the popular notion that schizophrenia arises as a consequence of an "early neurodevelopmental" lesion, more recent findings challenge this notion. Evidence, including our own data, suggests that dynamic brain changes occur during the earliest stages of a psychotic illness, including around the time of transition to illness. In this article we review the available longitudinal and relevant cross-sectional structural neuroimaging studies focusing on both the very early neurodevelopmental markers (pre- or perinatal origin) and the later markers (late neurodevelopmental) around the period of transition to illness. Based on our review of recent findings, we suggest that the onset of psychosis is a time of active brain changes, wherein, for a proportion of individuals, (i) an early (pre- and perinatal) neurodevelopmental lesion renders the brain vulnerable to anomalous late (particularly postpubertal) neurodevelopmental processes, as indicated by evidence for accelerated loss of gray matter and aberrant connectivity particularly in prefrontal regions; and (ii) these anomalous neurodevelopmental processes interact with other causative factors associated with the onset of psychosis (e.g., substance use, stress, and dysregulation of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis function), which together have neuroprogressive sequelae involving medial temporal and orbital prefrontal regions, as suggested by imaging studies around transition to active illness. However, the pathological processes underlying such progressive changes during "late neurodevelopment" remain unclear but may reflect anomalies of synaptic plasticity, abnormal brain maturation, the adverse effects of stress, or other environmental factors. In this context, the features of schizophrenia, including the neuropsychological deficits and behavioral manifestations, can be understood as direct effects of these multiple pathological processes at various neurodevelopmental stages, including genetic and nongenetic etiological factors.
-------------------------------------

10007665_234 - 0.907236405885 - science
[hydrothermal, formation, study, 6sus, synchrotron, tobermorite, hydrate, 5sus, xonotlite, calcium]

Hydrothermal formation of the calcium silicate hydrates, tobermorite (Ca 5Si 6O 16(OH) 2 ?? 4H 2O) and xonotlite (Ca 6Si 6O 17(OH) 2): An in situ synchrotron study
cited By (since 1996) 63
-------------------------------------

10004280_234 - 0.871715473921 - science
[neutrino, mass, mechanism, radiative]

Minimal Radiative Neutrino Mass Mechanism for Inverse Seesaw Models
We study a minimal one-loop radiative mechanism for generating small Majorana neutrino masses in inverse seesaw extensions of the Standard Model with two singlet fermions per family. The new feature of this radiative mechanism is that the one-loop induced left-handed neutrino mass matrix is directly proportional to the Majorana mass matrix of the right-handed neutrinos. This is a very economical scenario without necessitating the existence of non-standard scalar or gauge fields.
-------------------------------------

10005622_234 - 0.801017365871 - medicine
[hyperventilation, bowel, syndrome, sensitivity, irritable, colonic, rectal]

Effect of hyperventilation on distal colonic motility and rectal sensitivity in irritable bowel syndrome.
Hyperventilation is associated with some symptoms suggestive of irritable bowel syndrome and has been implicated in provoking excessive oesophageal contractility. Sixteen patients with irritable bowel syndrome were therefore studied in order to assess the effect of hyperventilation on distal colonic motility and rectal sensitivity. No significant change in either the amplitude or frequency of colonic contractile activity was noted following hyperventilation, nor was any alteration in rectal sensitivity observed. This study shows that acute hyperventilation does not affect colonic motor activity or visceral sensitivity and suggests that hyperventilation and irritable bowel syndrome are not causally related.
-------------------------------------

10009587_234 - 0.732366229304 - science
[acetaldehyde, xylitol, candida, production, ethanol]

Xylitol inhibits carcinogenic acetaldehyde production by Candida species.
Acetaldehyde is a highly toxic and mutagenic product of alcohol fermentation and metabolism which has been classified as a Class I carcinogen for humans by the International Agency for Research on Cancer of the World Health Organisation (WHO). Many Candida species representing oral microbiota have been shown to be capable of marked acetaldehyde production. The aim of our study was to examine the effects of various sugar alcohols and sugars on microbial acetaldehyde production. The study hypothesis was that xylitol could reduce the amount of acetaldehyde produced by Candida. Laboratory and clinical isolates of seven Candida species were selected for the study. The isolates were incubated in 12 mM ethanol and 110 mM glucose, fructose or xylitol at 37°C for 30 min and the formed acetaldehyde was measured by gas chromatography. Xylitol significantly (p < 0.0001) reduced the amount of acetaldehyde produced from ethanol by 84%. In the absence of xylitol, the mean acetaldehyde production in ethanol incubation was 220.5 μM and in ethanol-xylitol incubation 32.8 μM. This was found to be mediated by inhibition of the alcohol dehydrogenase enzyme activity. Coincubation with glucose reduced the amount of produced acetaldehyde by 23% and coincubation with fructose by 29%. At concentrations that are representative of those found in the oral cavity during the intake of proprietary xylitol products, xylitol was found to reduce the production of carcinogenic acetaldehyde from ethanol by Candida below the mutagenic level of 40-100 μM.
-------------------------------------

10003889_234 - 0.702214740208 - medicine
[readmission, discharge, mortality, admission, elderly, day, pneumonia, community-acquired, difference, length]

Outcomes in elderly Danish citizens admitted with community-acquired pneumonia. Regional differencties, in a public healthcare system.
OBJECTIVES: To evaluate regional differences in and risk factors for admission, length of stay, mortality, and readmission for community-acquired pneumonia in elderly Danish patients. METHODS: National registry study on elderly Danish citizens with an acute admission in 2009 owing to community-acquired pneumonia. We studied differences among hospitals in length of stay, in-hospital mortality, mortality within 30 days of discharge, and readmission within 30 days after discharge using Cox regression models with adjustments for age, sex, ventilatory support, and co-morbidity by Charlson's index score. RESULTS: A total of 11,332 elderly citizens were admitted with community-acquired pneumonia. Mortality during admission and 30-days from discharge were 11.6% and 16.2%, respectively. Readmission rates within 30 days of discharge were 12.3%. There were significantly differences between hospitals in length of stay. A high Charlson index score and advanced age were significantly risk factors for death during admission and within 30 days of discharge. Male sex and high Charlson index score were significant risk factors for readmission. Admission to large bed capacity hospital was a significant risk factor for death and readmission within 30 days of discharge. CONCLUSIONS: Length of stay, rate of admission, mortality and readmission in elderly Danish patients with community-acquired pneumonia follows international findings. There are regional differences between hospitals. In depth investigation in regional differences could reveal potential feasible clinical interventions with an improvement of readmission-, mortality rates and cost.
-------------------------------------

10009943_234 - 0.96993234922 - education
[internationalisation, student, education, curriculum, international, support, literature, review]

Internationalisation of the curriculum and the support of international students: a review of the literature
The aim of this review was to identify existing published literature and current practices of direct relevance to two priority areas for the Higher Education Academy in relation to internationalisation, namely internationalisation of the curriculum and the experiences of international students in UK universities (to include home/international student relations)This Project was commissioned by the Higher Education Academy (HEA) in March 2006. It developed from the HEA Internationalisation Forum on 5th December 2005 that focused on ‘Internationalising the Curriculum’ and ‘The Support of International Students’. One outcome from the Forum was the recognition that further research into these areas was required. To usefully build on existing work and support emerging policy and practice a bibliographic search and literature review was a necessary first step.Viv Caruana and Nicola Spurling in the Education Development Unit at the University of Salford were commissioned to conduct this work.
-------------------------------------

10003472_234 - 0.915448007477 - science
[astrocyte, neuron, astrocytic, excitability]

The astrocyte excitability brief: From receptors to gliotransmission.
Astrocytes do not merely serve as the supporting cast and scenery against which starring roles would be played by neurons. Rather, these glial cells are intimately involved in many of the brain's functions by responding to neuronal activity and modulating it. Such interplay between two principle neural cells, neurons and astrocytes, is evidenced in bi-directional glutamatergic astrocyte-neuron signaling. A key feature in this signaling pathway is astrocytic excitability based on variations of cytosolic Ca(2+). It enables astrocytes, through the activation of their glutamatergic receptors, to respond to the same signal used by nearby neurons in synaptic transmission. Furthermore, increases in cytosolic Ca(2+) in astrocytes can subsequently lead to Ca(2+)-dependent exocytotic secretion of gliotransmitter glutamate that in turn can signal to adjacent neurons. Astrocytic secretory machinery includes an assortment of exocytotic proteins which governs a merger of secretory vesicles to the plasma membrane. A cumulative knowledge on astrocytic excitability will aid better understanding of operating procedures in the brain in health and disease.
-------------------------------------

10018327_234 - 0.874846148381 - science
[cell, pylori, tumour, tumour-infiltrating, response, gastric, lymphoma]

Helicobacter pylori-specific tumour-infiltrating T cells provide contact dependent help for the growth of malignant B cells in low-grade gastric lymphoma of mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue.
Previous studies have shown that tumour cells from low-grade B-cell gastric lymphomas of mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT) type proliferate in vitro in response to heat-killed whole cell preparations of Helicobacter pylori, but only in the presence of tumour-infiltrating T cells. This response is strain-specific in that the tumours studied responded optimally to different strains of H. pylori. It was unclear from these studies, however, whether the ability to recognize the specific stimulating strains of H. pylori was a property of the tumour cells or the tumour-infiltrating T cells. This study shows that whereas the tumour cells do not respond to H. pylori, both freshly isolated tumour-infiltrating T cells and a T cell line derived from these cells proliferate in response to stimulating strains of H. pylori. T cells from the spleen of one of the patients do not share this property. These results suggest that B-cell proliferation in cases of low-grade gastric lymphoma of MALT type in vitro in response to H. pylori is due to recognition of H. pylori by tumour-infiltrating T cells, which in turn provide help for tumour cell proliferation. The observations provide an explanation for properties of gastric MALT-type lymphoma, such as regression following eradication of H. pylori and the tendency of the tumour to remain localized to the primary site.
-------------------------------------

10018222_234 - 0.759318200016 - technology_and_computing
[diffraction, material, system]

Multivariate analysis of pixelated diffraction data
A novel pixelated ASIC detector using Cadmium Telluride is applied to a combined energy dispersive- and angular dispersive- X-ray diffraction system. This system is designed to obtain multiple diffraction signatures of powdered materials simultaneously. The diffraction data is analyzed using multivariate partial least squares regression utilizing the diffraction spectra at multiple scatter angles, and material concentration in a three-way regression analysis. The calibration models are used to predict unknown samples, and show that utilizing the angular information can help improve concentration prediction in samples of mixtures and has potential in material identification systems.
-------------------------------------

10003278_234 - 0.716749646504 - science
[kd, assay, keloid]

Long-term organ culture of keloid disease tissue.
Keloid disease (KD) is a common fibroproliferative disorder of unknown aetiopathogenesis, with highly unsatisfactory treatment. Therefore, it is crucial to have a robust and clinically relevant model for studying KD pathobiology as well as preclinical testing of potential KD therapeutics. However, the unique occurrence of KD in human skin and the corresponding lack of animal models pose a major challenge in KD research. Therefore, we developed a simplified assay for the serum-free, long-term organ culture of KD tissue that facilitates quantitative analyses of major KD read-out parameters. Four millimetre KD punches embedded in a collagen matrix and organ-cultured at the epidermis air-liquid interphase (ALI) in supplemented William's E medium showed optimal tissue, cell and RNA preservation for up to 6 weeks (as measured by H & E and Pyronin Y histochemistry as well as by MTT assay, lactate dehydrogenase release and quantitative Ki67/TUNEL immunohistomorphometry). The keloid phenotype persisted well during this period, as shown by collagen-I and -III synthesis (Herovici's histochemistry staining and ELISA), and analysis of the expression of significant KD markers (CD3, CD20, CD31, CD34, CD56, tryptase, Langerin, vimentin, neutrophil elastase, CTGF and Collagen). To functionally evaluate whether this assay can test the response to candidate therapeutics, dexamethasone, a glucocorticosteroid often used in KD therapy, was administered. Indeed, dexamethasone significantly reduced the keloid volume and cellularity plus induced epidermal shrinkage. Therefore, this novel assay provides a quantitative, clinically relevant model system for studying KD pathobiology and response to treatment.
-------------------------------------

10008845_234 - 0.841373939502 - science
[tissue, enzyme, amine, lox, activity, oxidase]

Cross-linking of structural proteins in ageing skin: an in situ assay for the detection of amine oxidase activity.
With increasing age, dynamic tissues such as lungs, blood vessels and skin lose their ability to both deform and recoil, culminating in tissue stiffening. This loss of tissue elasticity, which profoundly impacts tissue function and thus morbidity, may be due not only to changes in the relative abundance of key extracellular matrix proteins within tissues but also to their accumulation of post-translational modifications. Whilst to date attention has focussed primarily on the age-related non-enzymatic formation of advanced glycation end products, the accumulation of pathological enzyme-mediated cross-links may also lead to age-related tissue stiffening. The lysyl oxidase (LOX) family of enzymes are constitutively expressed in adult tissues and are known to drive the catalysis of cross-links in both fibrillar collagens and elastin. Although immunochemical approaches are commonly used to localise the inactive pro-enzyme of LOX, and biochemical methods are employed to quantify activity in homogenised tissue, they do not allow for the in situ localisation of the enzyme. Thus, we have developed a novel assay to both detect and localise LOX enzyme activity in situ. LOX family members are amine oxidases and this assay uses the principle that an amine substrate in the presence of this class of enzyme will be oxidised to an aldehyde and hydrogen peroxide (H(2)O(2)). In turn, H(2)O(2), when combined with luminol and horseradish peroxidase, will produce a light-emitting reaction that can be detected by film autoradiography. The development of a technique to localise specific amine oxidase activity in tissue sections may provide crucial additional information on the exact role played by this class of enzymes in mediating age-related tissue stiffening.
-------------------------------------

10003722_234 - 0.746476149055 - technology_and_computing
[visualization, object, architecture, structure, capability, datum, dataset, need, database, pipeline]

Enabling Visualization of Massive Datasets Through MPP Database Architecture
We are developing a novel visualization architecture which is specifically designed to render very large (terabyte scale) datasets. Our method differs from the classic visualization pipeline of Harber and McNabb. In particular we eliminate the need to create geometric objects, for example surfaces composed of polygons, as a stage before rendering. Such objects require specialist HPC servers for their creation and manipulation; our solution eliminates the need for such servers. We replace the geometric objects by structures stored and tagged in a database next to the original dataset; we call these Spatially Registered Data Structures (SRDS). Such structures are linked to a single rendering pipeline through the on-the-fly creation of a Feature Embedded Spatial Volume (FESVo). This solution exploits recently developed capabilities of in-database Massive Parallel Processing (MPP) and parallel data streaming, together with the rapidly developing capabilities of GPUs. We describe an early prototype of an architecture applied to seismic data from the oil and gas industry.
-------------------------------------

10007278_234 - 0.883183134079 - science
[apoptosis, mouse, skin, role]

Role of Fas/Fas ligand-mediated apoptosis in murine contact hypersensitivity.
Apoptosis plays an important role in immune responses, but little is known about its involvement in contact hypersensitivity (CH). In this study, we have investigated the role of Fas/Fas ligand (FasL)-mediated apoptosis in the pathogenesis of CH. Mice were sensitized by one topical application of 100 microl of 3% oxazolone to shaved skin of the abdomen. Six days later, CH was provoked by challenging both sides of sensitized mouse right ear with 15 microl of 1% oxazolone. Using a DNA ladder assay, we found that apoptosis was induced in the skin of oxazolone-sensitized mice 24-96 h after allergen challenge. Annexin V-fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC)-propidium iodide (PI) apoptosis flow cytometric assay showed that early apoptotic CD4(+) T cells (annexin V-FITC(+)PI(-)), but not late apoptotic CD4(+) T cells (annexin V-FITC(+)PI(+)), increased in the inflamed skin of mice with CH. Moreover, the expressions of mRNAs for T helper (Th2) cytokine (interleukin (IL)-4), Th1 cytokine (interferon (IFN)-gamma) and proapoptotic molecules (Bax, Fas, FasL and IL-1beta-converting enzyme (ICE)/caspase-1) were significantly elevated in the oxazolone-sensitized mouse skin 6-72 h after allergen challenge. Dramatic increase in IL-10 mRNA was only observed in the sensitized mouse skin 6 and 12 h after allergen challenge. Furthermore, CH was significantly inhibited with decreased apoptosis and early apoptotic CD4(+) T cells in inflamed skin in Fas mutant lpr/lpr mice compared to wild-type mice, whereas there were no significant differences in IL-4, IFN-gamma, IL-10, Bax and ICE mRNAs in the inflamed skin of CH between lpr/lpr and wild-type mice. Our results thus suggest that Fas/FasL pathway partially contributes to apoptosis in murine CH and that Fas/FasL-mediated apoptosis plays a partial role in the development of CH. The contribution of Fas/FasL-mediated apoptosis to CH appears independent of Th1 and Th2 cytokines.
-------------------------------------

10017089_234 - 0.829388240119 - medicine
[treatment, psoriasis, severe, pasi, goal, moderate, phase, plaque, patient, consensus]

Definition of treatment goals for moderate to severe psoriasis: a European consensus.
Patients with moderate to severe psoriasis are undertreated. To solve this persistent problem, the consensus programme was performed to define goals for treatment of plaque psoriasis with systemic therapy and to improve patient care. An expert consensus meeting and a collaborative Delphi procedure were carried out. Nineteen dermatologists from different European countries met for a face-to-face discussion and defined items through a four-round Delphi process. Severity of plaque psoriasis was graded into mild and moderate to severe disease. Mild disease was defined as body surface area (BSA) ≤10 and psoriasis area and severity index (PASI) ≤10 and dermatology life quality index (DLQI) ≤10 and moderate to severe psoriasis as (BSA > 10 or PASI > 10) and DLQI > 10. Special clinical situations may change mild psoriasis to moderate to severe including involvement of visible areas or severe nail involvement. For systemic therapy of plaque psoriasis two treatment phases were defined: (1) induction phase as the treatment period until week 16; however, depending on the type of drug and dose regimen used, this phase may be extended until week 24 and (2) maintenance phase for all drugs was defined as the treatment period after the induction phase. For the definition of treatment goals in plaque psoriasis, the change of PASI from baseline until the time of evaluation (ΔPASI) and the absolute DLQI were used. After induction and during maintenance therapy, treatment can be continued if reduction in PASI is ≥75%. The treatment regimen should be modified if improvement of PASI is <50%. In a situation where the therapeutic response improved ≥50% but <75%, as assessed by PASI, therapy should be modified if the DLQI is >5 but can be continued if the DLQI is ≤5. This programme defines the severity of plaque psoriasis for the first time using a formal consensus of 19 European experts. In addition, treatment goals for moderate to severe disease were established. Implementation of treatment goals in the daily management of psoriasis will improve patient care and mitigate the problem of undertreatment. It is planned to evaluate the implementation of these treatment goals in a subsequent programme involving patients and physicians.
-------------------------------------

10007521_234 - 0.759605361387 - science
[serum, assay, use, clinical, variation, plasma]

Optimisation of circulating biomarkers of cell death for routine clinical use.
BACKGROUND: M30 and M65 enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays detect circulating cytokeratin 18 fragments released during caspase-dependent or total cell death, respectively, and have potential as biomarkers in epithelial cancers. While these assays have been validated, their robustness for routine clinical use is unknown. PATIENTS AND METHODS: M30 and M65 were measured in matched serum and plasma samples from 31 lung cancer patients and 18 controls. RESULTS: Time allowable between sample acquisition and processing is critical for assays in clinical use. A 4-h delay in processing at room temperature increased M30 (P < 0.0001), an effect minimised by incubation on ice. M30 and M65 in serum were resistant to processing variations including delays. Serum and plasma measurements correlated well although M30 but not M65 was lower in serum (P < 0.0005). Less variation between duplicate assays was observed in serum. Prolonged storage (-80 degrees C) led to increased M30 (12%, 6 months; 34%, 1 year). Sample dilution in the supplied assay diluent proved non-linear, whereas dilution in donor serum or porcine plasma restored linearity up to a ratio of 1 : 6. CONCLUSION: We present recommendations that improve the reliability of these assays for clinical use and recommend serum as the preferred matrix with data more resistant to variations in collection.
-------------------------------------

10011175_234 - 0.830690288681 - science
[coating, field, elastic, layer, parameter, acoustic, effect, quasi-resonance]

Quasi-resonances in sound-insulating coatings
This paper is concerned with the radiation of sound waves from a submerged cylindrical body which is coated by an imperfect elastic layer; that is, the coating only covers part of the cylinder. The focus of the study is to quantify the effect of the gap in the elastic layer on the radiated acoustic power. A finite element method is employed to determine the acoustic pressure field in the fluid and the displacement field in the coupled layer. This reveals that the effect of a modest sized gap in the coating does not markedly alter the radiated field except at distinct frequencies, at which values the coating exhibits strong fluid-coupled oscillations. We develop a simple analytical model to explain the resonance phenomenon and show that quasi-resonances arise when the wavelength of the deformation pattern 'matches' the azimuthal length of the surface of the coating. This resonant behaviour is conveniently captured by a single parameter Q, which is the ratio of the typical inertial fluid pressure induced by the wall oscillation to the stiffness of the elastic coating. For each choice of material parameters, there is shown to be an infinite set of values of Q corresponding to distinct quasi-resonance mode numbers. The effects on the radiated field due to variations in various physical parameters, such as acoustic wavenumber and elastic layer inertia, are also discussed. (C) 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
-------------------------------------

10005595_234 - 0.951046906032 - medicine
[patient, coronary, oesophageal, ventricular, psychiatric, dysfunction, disorder, angina, artery, pain]

Angina-like chest pain: a joint medical and psychiatric investigation.
Sixty three patients with chest pain typical of angina and who had normal coronary angiograms were investigated for left ventricular, oesophageal and psychiatric abnormalities. An additional 21 patients, age and sex matched, who had angina and significant coronary artery disease were also studied. Eighty six per cent of the 63 patients without evidence of coronary artery disease could be demonstrated to have a physical abnormality (left ventricular dysfunction in 35%, oesophageal disorder 51%). There was, however, a wide variation in the incidence of psychiatric morbidity between the diagnostic subgroups-18% in left ventricular dysfunction, 29% in those with coronary artery disease and 59% in patients with oesophageal disorders (P less than 0.01). Thus failure to identify left ventricular dysfunction and inclusion of such subjects in psychological assessments of 'angiogram-negative' chest pain might give misleading results. This study confirms that patients with angina and normal coronary angiography have a high incidence of oesophageal disorders. However psychiatric illness is also common in this group of subjects and management needs to take both these factors into account.
-------------------------------------

10009153_234 - 0.746343182651 - science
[chain, glycolipid, structure, lamellar, material, assembly, dodecyl, dynamics, headgroup, molecular]

Molecular dynamics study of anhydrous lamellar structures of synthetic glycolipids: effects of chain branching and disaccharide headgroup.
Glycolipids form materials of considerable potential for a wide range of surfactant and thin film applications. Understanding the effect of glycolipid covalent structure on the properties of their thermotropic and lyotropic assemblies is a key step toward rational design of new glycolipid-based materials. Here, we perform molecular dynamics simulations of anhydrous bilayers of dodecyl β-maltoside, dodecyl β-cellobioside, dodecyl β-isomaltoside, and a C(12)C(10) branched β-maltoside. Specifically, we examine the consequences of chain branching and headgroup identity on the structure and dynamics of the lamellar assemblies. Chain branching of the glycolipid leads to measurable differences in the dimensions and interactions of the lamellar assembly, as well as a more fluid-like hydrophobic chain region. Substitution of the maltosyl headgroup of βMal-C(12) by an isomaltosyl moiety leads to a significant decrease in bilayer spacing as well as a markedly altered pattern of inter-headgroup hydrogen bonding. The distinctive simulated structures of the two regioisomers provide insight into the difference of ∼90 °C in their observed clearing temperatures. For all four simulated glycolipid systems, with the exception of the sn-2 chain of the branched maltoside, the alkyl chains are ordered and exhibit a distinct tilt, consistent with recent crystallographic analysis of a branched chain Guerbet glycoside. These insights into structure-property relationships from simulation provide an important molecular basis for future design of synthetic glycolipid materials.
-------------------------------------

10008047_234 - 0.746860136329 - science
[variant, locus, gene, trait, human, variation, genetic, study, polygenic]

Hundreds of variants clustered in genomic loci and biological pathways affect human height.
Most common human traits and diseases have a polygenic pattern of inheritance: DNA sequence variants at many genetic loci influence the phenotype. Genome-wide association (GWA) studies have identified more than 600 variants associated with human traits, but these typically explain small fractions of phenotypic variation, raising questions about the use of further studies. Here, using 183,727 individuals, we show that hundreds of genetic variants, in at least 180 loci, influence adult height, a highly heritable and classic polygenic trait. The large number of loci reveals patterns with important implications for genetic studies of common human diseases and traits. First, the 180 loci are not random, but instead are enriched for genes that are connected in biological pathways (P = 0.016) and that underlie skeletal growth defects (P < 0.001). Second, the likely causal gene is often located near the most strongly associated variant: in 13 of 21 loci containing a known skeletal growth gene, that gene was closest to the associated variant. Third, at least 19 loci have multiple independently associated variants, suggesting that allelic heterogeneity is a frequent feature of polygenic traits, that comprehensive explorations of already-discovered loci should discover additional variants and that an appreciable fraction of associated loci may have been identified. Fourth, associated variants are enriched for likely functional effects on genes, being over-represented among variants that alter amino-acid structure of proteins and expression levels of nearby genes. Our data explain approximately 10% of the phenotypic variation in height, and we estimate that unidentified common variants of similar effect sizes would increase this figure to approximately 16% of phenotypic variation (approximately 20% of heritable variation). Although additional approaches are needed to dissect the genetic architecture of polygenic human traits fully, our findings indicate that GWA studies can identify large numbers of loci that implicate biologically relevant genes and pathways.
-------------------------------------

10004224_234 - 0.804007828124 - technology_and_computing
[prover, tableau, platform, generation, mettel2]

MetTeL2: Towards a Tableau Prover Generation Platform
To appear
-------------------------------------

10011094_234 - 0.830690288681 - science
[coating, field, elastic, layer, parameter, acoustic, effect, quasi-resonance]

Quasi-resonances in sound-insulating coatings
This paper is concerned with the radiation of sound waves from a submerged cylindrical body which is coated by an imperfect elastic layer; that is, the coating only covers part of the cylinder. The focus of the study is to quantify the effect of the gap in the elastic layer on the radiated acoustic power. A finite element method is employed to determine the acoustic pressure field in the fluid and the displacement field in the coupled layer. This reveals that the effect of a modest sized gap in the coating does not markedly alter the radiated field except at distinct frequencies, at which values the coating exhibits strong fluid-coupled oscillations. We develop a simple analytical model to explain the resonance phenomenon and show that quasi-resonances arise when the wavelength of the deformation pattern 'matches' the azimuthal length of the surface of the coating. This resonant behaviour is conveniently captured by a single parameter Q, which is the ratio of the typical inertial fluid pressure induced by the wall oscillation to the stiffness of the elastic coating. For each choice of material parameters, there is shown to be an infinite set of values of Q corresponding to distinct quasi-resonance mode numbers. The effects on the radiated field due to variations in various physical parameters, such as acoustic wavenumber and elastic layer inertia, are also discussed. (C) 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
-------------------------------------

10018111_234 - 0.789980949616 - science
[atrial, mutation, s140g, model, excitation, kcnq1, wave, tissue, fibrillation, vulnerability]

Pro-arrhythmogenic Effects of the S140G KCNQ1 Mutation in Human Atrial Fibrillation - Insights from Modelling.
Functional analysis has shown that the missense gain-in-function KCNQ1 S140G mutation associated with familial atrial fibrillation produces an increase of the slow delayed rectifier potassium current (IKs). Through computer modelling, this study investigated mechanisms by which the KCNQ1 S140G mutation promotes and perpetuates atrial fibrillation. In simulations, the Courtemanche et al. model of human atrial cell action potentials (APs) was modified to incorporate experimental data on changes of IKs induced by the KCNQ1 S140G mutation. The cell models for wild type (WT) and mutant type (MT) IKs were incorporated into homogeneous multicellular 2D and 3D tissue models. Effects of the mutation were quantified on: AP profile; AP duration (APD) restitution; effective refractory period (ERP) restitution and conduction velocity (CV) restitution. Temporal and spatial vulnerabilities of atrial tissue to genesis of re-entry were computed. Dynamic behaviours of re-entrant excitation waves (lifespan (LS), tip meandering patterns and dominant frequency) in 2D and 3D models were characterised. It was shown that the KCNQ1 S140G mutation abbreviated atrial APD and ERP and flattened APD and ERP restitution curves. It reduced atrial CV at low excitation rates, but increased it at high excitation rates that facilitated the conduction of high rate atrial excitation waves. Although it increased slightly tissue temporal vulnerability for initiating re-entry, it reduced markedly the minimal substrate size necessary for sustaining re-entry (increasing the tissue spatial vulnerability). In the 2D and 3D models, the mutation also stabilized and accelerated re-entrant excitation waves, leading to rapid and sustained re-entry. In the 3D model, scroll waves under the mutation condition MT conditions also degenerated into persistent and erratic wavelets, leading to fibrillation. In conclusion, increased IKs due to the KCNQ1 S140G mutation increases atrial susceptibility to arrhythmia due to increased tissue vulnerability, shortened ERP and altered atrial conduction velocity, which, in combination, facilitate initiation and maintenance of re-entrant excitation waves.
-------------------------------------

10009840_234 - 0.908009679196 - science
[neutrophil, albican, phagocytosis]

Interaction of Candida krusei with human neutrophils in vitro.
In human neutrophil monolayer assays the percentage phagocytosis of Candida krusei by neutrophils was found to be significantly lower (9%) than that for C. albicans (37%). Both organisms required opsonisation with complement products for ingestion. The number of competent neutrophils phagocytosing C. krusei was increased with: antisera specific to C. albicans (49%); the neutrophil chemo-attractant formyl-methionyl-leucyl-phenylalanine (fmlp) (49%); mannan extracted from the cell wall of C. albicans (72%); and a crude cell extract from C. krusei (61%). In the case of C. albicans all but one of these methods increased the proportion of phagocytosing neutrophils per slide. The data provide evidence for differences in quantitative phagocytosis of C. krusei and C. albicans and suggest that C. krusei is resistant to phagocytosis in vitro.
-------------------------------------

10010342_234 - 0.854437992433 - science
[metabolic, datum, modeling, time, gene, switch, flux, antibiotic]

Metabolic modeling and analysis of the metabolic switch in Streptomyces coelicolor
Background: The transition from exponential to stationary phase in Streptomyces coelicolor is accompanied by a major metabolic switch and results in a strong activation of secondary metabolism. Here we have explored the underlying reorganization of the metabolome by combining computational predictions based on constraint-based modeling and detailed transcriptomics time course observations.Results: We reconstructed the stoichiometric matrix of S. coelicolor, including the major antibiotic biosynthesis pathways, and performed flux balance analysis to predict flux changes that occur when the cell switches from biomass to antibiotic production. We defined the model input based on observed fermenter culture data and used a dynamically varying objective function to represent the metabolic switch. The predicted fluxes of many genes show highly significant correlation to the time series of the corresponding gene expression data. Individual mispredictions identify novel links between antibiotic production and primary metabolism.Conclusion: Our results show the usefulness of constraint-based modeling for providing a detailed interpretation of time course gene expression data. ?? 2010 Alam et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd.
-------------------------------------

10017774_234 - 0.950563176007 - science
[lipid, transformation, substrate, glycolipid]

Accelerated Enzymatic Galactosylation of N-Acetylglucosaminolipids in Lipid Microdomains
A fluoro-tagged N-acetylglucosamine-capped glycolipid that can form lipid microdomains in fluid phospholipid bilayers has been shown to be enzymatically galactosylated by bovine β(1,4)-galactosyltransferase. MALDI MS, HPLC, and LC–MS revealed that the rate of enzymatic transformation was significantly enhanced by lipid clustering; at a 1% mol/mol loading, clustered glycolipids were galactosylated 9-fold faster than glycolipids dispersed across the bilayer surface. The transformation of the GlcNAc “glycocalyx” into a Gal(β1–4)GlcNAc “glycocalyx” relabeled these vesicles, making them susceptible to agglutination by Erythrina cristagalli lectin (ECL). The kinetic parameters for this transformation revealed a lower apparent Km when the substrate lipids were clustered, which is attributed to multivalent binding to an extended substrate cleft around the active site. These observations may have important implications where soluble enzymes act on substrates embedded within cellular lipid rafts.
-------------------------------------

10004859_234 - 0.905784908422 - medicine
[clozapine, period, patient, study, reduction]

The cost-effectiveness of clozapine: a controlled, population-based, mirror-image study
A retrospective cohort study, with a mirror-image design, was used to measure inpatient service utilization in 63 consecutive patients started on clozapine from a geographical catchment area compared to a control group matched for previous inpatient service use. An intent-to-treat analysis, including those patients (n = 28) who discontinued clozapine during the study period, showed a significant reduction in number of admissions and total time spent in hospital in the 2 years following clozapine initiation compared to the previous 2 years and to the follow-up period in the control group. This translated into a reduction of £7300 in hospitalization costs per patient started on clozapine, over the 2-year period. In those patients whocontinued clozapine treatment for the whole of the 2-year period, there was a two-thirds reduction in number of admissions and total time spent in hospital compared to no change in the clozapine discontinuers. These findings suggest that clozapine is a clinically and cost-effective intervention for severe schizophrenia in routine clinical settings.
-------------------------------------

10003303_234 - 0.809292605697 - medicine
[brain, stroke, inflammation, risk, systemic, animal]

Brain inflammation is induced by co-morbidities and risk factors for stroke.
Chronic systemic inflammatory conditions, such as atherosclerosis, diabetes and obesity are associated with increased risk of stroke, which suggests that systemic inflammation may contribute to the development of stroke in humans. The hypothesis that systemic inflammation may induce brain pathology can be tested in animals, and this was the key objective of the present study. First, we assessed inflammatory changes in the brain in rodent models of chronic, systemic inflammation. PET imaging revealed increased microglia activation in the brain of JCR-LA (corpulent) rats, which develop atherosclerosis and obesity, compared to the control lean strain. Immunostaining against Iba1 confirmed reactive microgliosis in these animals. An atherogenic diet in apolipoprotein E knock-out (ApoE(-/-)) mice induced microglial activation in the brain parenchyma within 8 weeks and increased expression of vascular adhesion molecules. Focal lipid deposition and neuroinflammation in periventricular and cortical areas and profound recruitment of activated myeloid phagocytes, T cells and granulocytes into the choroid plexus were also observed. In a small, preliminary study, patients at risk of stroke (multiple risk factors for stroke, with chronically elevated C-reactive protein, but negative MRI for brain pathology) exhibited increased inflammation in the brain, as indicated by PET imaging. These findings show that brain inflammation occurs in animals, and tentatively in humans, harbouring risk factors for stroke associated with elevated systemic inflammation. Thus a "primed" inflammatory environment in the brain may exist in individuals at risk of stroke and this can be adequately recapitulated in appropriate co-morbid animal models.
-------------------------------------

10005549_234 - 0.732737678817 - medicine
[endoscopy, immediate, haemorrhage, gastrointestinal, acute, patient, next-day, upper, comparison]

Comparison between admission and next-day endoscopy in the management of acute upper gastrointestinal haemorrhage.
In a prospective study, a comparison between immediate and next-day endoscopy has been made in 100 patients with acute upper gastrointestinal haemorrhage. Neither regime was statistically superior to the other. It is concluded that in the majority of patients immediate emergency endoscopy is unnecessary.
-------------------------------------

10007512_234 - 0.952961201521 - medicine
[symptom, patient, lung, cancer, experience, cluster]

A qualitative exploration of a respiratory distress symptom cluster in lung cancer: cough, breathlessness and fatigue.
UNLABELLED: There is a growing awareness that symptoms frequently co-occur in 'symptom clusters' and that understanding these clusters may improve the management of unrelieved symptoms in patients. In-depth longitudinal exploration of lung cancer patients' symptom experiences is used to examine patient symptom experiences and distress across the disease trajectory of lung cancer. METHODS: Semi-structured interviews were conducted with patients and their primary caregivers at four time points: at the beginning of treatment and then subsequently at three, six, and twelve months. Interpretative Phenomenological Analysis was employed in the data analysis. FINDINGS: Findings indicate that a cluster of interacting respiratory symptoms play a central role in patients' symptom experiences within the lung cancer population. The interviews also suggest that symptoms such as cough which are under-represented in research within this population may play an important role in patients' symptom experiences. DISCUSSION: Longitudinal qualitative investigation offers a valuable method for improving our understanding of patients' experiences of lung cancer and for identifying potential opportunities to improve patient quality of life.
-------------------------------------

10008707_234 - 0.769689545111 - science
[cell, ctm, cancer, tumor, ctc, emt, patient, lung]

Circulating tumor cells as a window on metastasis biology in lung cancer.
Circulating tumor cell (CTC) number in metastatic cancer patients yields prognostic information consistent with enhanced cell migration and invasion via loss of adhesion, a feature of epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT). Tumor cells also invade via collective migration with maintained cell-cell contacts and consistent with this is the circulating tumor microemboli (CTM; contiguous groups of tumor cells) that are observed in metastatic cancer patients. Using a blood filtration approach, we examined markers of EMT (cytokeratins, E-cadherin, vimentin, neural cadherin) and prevalence of apoptosis in CTCs and CTM to explore likely mechanism(s) of invasion in lung cancer patients and address the hypothesis that cells within CTM have a survival advantage. Intra-patient and inter-patient heterogeneity was observed for EMT markers in CTCs and CTM. Vimentin was only expressed in some CTCs, but in the majority of cells within CTM; E-cadherin expression was lost, cytoplasmic or nuclear, and rarely expressed at the surface of the cells within CTM. A subpopulation of CTCs was apoptotic, but apoptosis was absent within CTM. This pilot study suggests that EMT is not prosecuted homogeneously in tumor cells within the circulation of lung cancer patients and that collective migration and enhanced survival of cells within CTM might contribute to lung cancer metastasis. Multiplex analysis and further detailed exploration of metastatic potential and EMT in CTCs/CTM is now warranted in a larger patient cohort.
-------------------------------------

10003679_234 - 0.771700271066 - technology_and_computing
[machine, technique, motor, in-service, zone, cable, gas, monitoring]

On-Line Partial Discharge Testing of In-Service Rotating Machines in Ex Hazardous Environments by Employment of Central Monitoring Solutions
Carrying out the on-line partial discharge (OLPD)testing of in-service high voltage (HV) rotating machines canbe an effective technique to understand any insulationdegradation mechanisms that may be present within the statorwindings. Interpretation of OLPD measurements performedon rotating machines can be difficult due to the presence ofnoise and interference from variable speed drives (VSD’s)and/or motor exciter systems. The new PD measurement andmonitoring techniques outlined in this paper are carried out atthe switchgear-end of the machine’s feeder cable, at distancesof up to 2km from the machine under test. It has been shownthat this remote monitoring technique eliminates much of thishigh-frequency interference which can be seen at themachines’ terminal box. This is due to the effect of the highvoltage power cable between the switchgear and the machine,with the cable acting as a low-pass filter, stripping out higherfrequency signals whilst retaining lower frequencies. Also,most importantly for operators with motors located within‘Ex’ hazardous gas zones such as in the oil & gas industry, theremote monitoring technique allows these motors to bemonitored without the need to enter the ‘Ex’ zone to installsensors or monitors. The authors present case studies from twooil & gas companies showing how the technique has been usedfor monitoring PD of in-service motors located in Ex zones.
-------------------------------------

10012733_234 - 0.910004358569 - science
[sulfate, dioxide, sulfur, emission, wet, non-linearity, oxidn, cloudy, deposition]

The role of cloud processing in the relationship between wet deposited sulphur and sulphur dioxide emissions.
It is well established that wet deposition of sulfate in the UK has fallen by a much smaller fraction than have emissions of sulfur dioxide. Dry deposition of sulfur has decreased in proportion to the decline in emissions. A no. of suggestions have been made which offer possible explanations for this non-linearity between emissions and wet deposition. In this paper a model of the processing of sulfur dioxide by aq. phase cloud chem. in a cloudy boundary layer is presented. This work does not simulate all the details of the mechanisms by which sulfate is incorporated into pptn. It does, however, explore the non-linearity of this oxidn. process. It is shown that the oxidn. of sulfur dioxide, in these conditions, over the UK is dominated by oxidn. by ozone. The rate of sulfate prodn. is then controlled by the availability of the one basic trace gas in the atm., ammonia. Using realistic concns. of the reacting species this is found to simulate well the obsd. non-linearity. The model predicts that sulfate and sulfur dioxide concns. will be uncorrelated in the cloudy boundary layer but that ammonium and sulfate will be well correlated. Field observations at a cloudy site in Northern England are consistent with these predictions. on SciFinder (R)
-------------------------------------

10003463_234 - 0.88289075863 - science
[il-1, resolution, inflammation, inflammasome]

A Genetically Encoded IL-1β Bioluminescence Resonance Energy Transfer Sensor To Monitor Inflammasome Activity.
Inflammation is fundamental for protecting the organism against infection and injury. However, a failure to control immune response results in chronic inflammation and several associated disorders such as pain and loss of function. Initiation of inflammation is orchestrated by cytokines, among which IL-1β is particularly important. IL-1β is synthesized as an inactive protein that has to be processed by the inflammasome to generate the mature bioactive form. Conventional techniques cannot monitor IL-1β activation with high spatial and temporal resolution. In this study, we present a ratiometric biosensor that allows monitoring IL-1β processing in real time, with a temporal resolution of seconds and with a single-cell spatial resolution. Using this sensor, to our knowledge, we describe for the first time the kinetic of the inflammasome activity in living macrophages. With this new probe, we also demonstrated that the pro-IL-1β processing occurs all over the cytoplasm.
-------------------------------------

10005050_234 - 0.886405503408 - science
[hydrogen, simulation, mass, neutral, molecular]

Modelling neutral hydrogen in galaxies using cosmological hydrodynamical simulations
The characterization of the atomic and molecular hydrogen content ofhigh-redshift galaxies is a major observational challenge that will beaddressed over the coming years with a new generation of radiotelescopes. We investigate this important issue by considering thestates of hydrogen across a range of structures within high-resolutioncosmological hydrodynamical simulations. In addition, our simulationsallow us to investigate the sensitivity of our results to numericalresolution and to sub-grid baryonic physics (especially feedback fromsupernovae and active galactic nuclei). We find that the mostsignificant uncertainty in modelling the neutral hydrogen distributionarises from our need to model a self-shielding correction in moderatedensity regions. Future simulations incorporating radiative transferschemes will be vital to improve on our empirical self-shieldingthreshold. Irrespective of the exact nature of the threshold, we findthat while the atomic hydrogen mass function evolves only mildly fromredshift two to zero, the molecular hydrogen mass function increaseswith increasing redshift, especially at the high-mass end.Interestingly, the weak evolution of the neutral hydrogen mass functionis insensitive to the feedback scheme utilized, but the opposite is truefor the molecular gas, which is more closely associated with the starformation in the simulations.
-------------------------------------

10009855_234 - 0.796899944352 - science
[mid-level, convective, stratus, embedded, supercooled, observation, cell, acpd, multiplication, ice]

Observations of ice multiplication in a weakly convective cell embedded in supercooled mid-level stratus
ACPD
-------------------------------------

10008674_234 - 0.80581897484 - medicine
[narrative, patient, care, response, patient-centred]

Patient narratives: the potential for "patient-centred" interprofessional learning?
The central theme of the paper is concerned with the educational potential that patient narratives may hold for improving patient-centred interprofessional care. It follows the processes of a research project that was required to provide an educational intervention in a multiprofessionally-staffed stroke rehabilitation ward. It discusses the evolution of the project, focusing on the ways in which patient narratives were constructed, the purposes they served, and the responses of professionals to the narratives in subsequent workshops. Along the way, the paper reflects on the responses of patients that problematise the notion of "patient-centred" care. Together with the responses of professionals to the narratives, the paper raises questions about the obstacles to and possibilities for such care.
-------------------------------------

10017141_234 - 0.877713909363 - science
[tumour, cancer, oxygen, molecule, metabolism, low, systems, analysis, biology]

Systems Biology of HIF Metabolism in Cancer
Lay AbstractThe University of ManchesterFaculty of Engineering and Physical SciencesLay Abstract of thesis entitled ‘Systems Biology of HIF Metabolism in Cancer’Submitted by Emily Grace Armitage for the degree of Doctor of Philosophy, September 2012Cancer is one of the most devastating human diseases that cause a vast number of mortalities worldwide each year. Cancer research is one of the largest fields in the life sciences and despite many astounding breakthroughs and contributions over the past few decades, there is still a considerable amount to unveil on the function of cancer that would improve diagnostics, prognostics and therapy. Since cancer is known to involve a wide range of processes, applying methods to study it as a whole system could reveal new properties of cancer. Systems biology is becoming an increasingly popular tool in the life sciences. The approach has been applied to many biological and biomedical analyses drawing upon recent advancements in technology. When tumours grow, their oxygen supply becomes scarce and they need to employ mechanisms to overcome this for survival. In this thesis, tumour metabolism has been investigated with particular emphasis on how tumours respond to low oxygen. This has involved the analysis small molecules using state of the art techniques to determine which molecules are caused by and appear to promote survival in tumour cells in low oxygen. These molecules have also been imaged in cross sections of tumours to see where they occur and to hypothesise the function of these molecules based on their position with respect to oxygen availability. Using the data from each analysis it has been possible to link together knowledge about the molecules revealed to consider how tumours survive in low oxygen as a whole system.
-------------------------------------

10004827_234 - 0.710624083997 - medicine
[e-stim, dysphagia]

Electrical stimulation and swallowing: how much do we know?
Consequences of dysphagia substantially reduce quality of life, increase the risk of medical complications and mortality, and pose a substantial cost to healthcare systems. As a result, it is of no wonder that the clinical and scientific communities are showing interest in new avenues for dysphagia rehabilitation. Electrical stimulation (e-stim) for the treatment of swallowing impairments is among the most studied swallowing interventions in the published literature, yet many unanswered questions about its efficacy remain. In the meantime, many speech-language pathologists who treat dysphagia are attending educational and training sessions to obtain certifications to use this technique. Here, we review the values and limitations of the published literature on the topic of e-stim for swallowing to assist clinicians in decision making in their clinical practice. The discussion provides a review of swallowing anatomy and physiology, the fundamentals of e-stim, and information essential for the readers' independent critique of these studies--all of which are crucial for evaluating the possible effects of e-stim.
-------------------------------------

10009686_234 - 0.729459163341 - science
[mkk4, kinase, gene, jnk, mouse, defect, mkk7, protein, brain]

Targeted deletion of the mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase 4 gene in the nervous system causes severe brain developmental defects and premature death.
The c-Jun NH2-terminal protein kinase (JNK) is a mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) involved in the regulation of various physiological processes. Its activity is increased upon phosphorylation by the MAPK kinases MKK4 and MKK7. The early embryonic death of mice lacking an mkk4 or mkk7 gene has provided genetic evidence that MKK4 and MKK7 have nonredundant functions in vivo. To elucidate the physiological role of MKK4, we generated a novel mouse model in which the mkk4 gene could be specifically deleted in the brain. At birth, the mutant mice were indistinguishable from their control littermates, but they stopped growing a few days later and died prematurely, displaying severe neurological defects. Decreased JNK activity in the absence of MKK4 correlated with impaired phosphorylation of a subset of physiologically relevant JNK substrates and with altered gene expression. These defects resulted in the misalignment of the Purkinje cells in the cerebellum and delayed radial migration in the cerebral cortex. Together, our data demonstrate for the first time that MKK4 is an essential activator of JNK required for the normal development of the brain.
-------------------------------------

10017017_234 - 0.9343879055 - medicine
[bpst, therapy, trial, patient, intervention, ad, psychological, agitation, improvement]

Brief psychosocial therapy for the treatment of agitation in Alzheimer disease (the CALM-AD trial).
BACKGROUND: Good practice guidelines state that a psychological intervention should usually precede pharmacotherapy, but there are no data evaluating the feasibility of psychological interventions used in this way. METHODS: At the first stage of a randomized blinded placebo-controlled trial, 318 patients with Alzheimer disease (AD) with clinically significant agitated behavior were treated in an open design with a psychological intervention (brief psychosocial therapy BPST) for 4 weeks, preceding randomization to pharmacotherapy. The therapy involved social interaction, personalized music, or removal of environmental triggers. RESULTS: Overall, 318 patients with AD completed BPST with an improvement of 5.6 points on the total Cohen-Mansfield Agitation Inventory (CMAI; mean SD, 63.3 16.0 to 57.7 18.4, t = 4.8, df = 317, p < 0.0001). Therapy worksheets were completed in six of the eight centers, with the key elements of the intervention delivered according to the manual for >95% of patients. More detailed evaluation of outcome was completed for the 198 patients with AD from these centers, who experienced a mean improvement of 6.6 points on the total CMAI (mean SD, 62.2 14.3 to 55.6 15.8, t = 6.5, df = 197, p < 0.0001). Overall, 43% of participants achieved a 30% improvement in their level of agitation. CONCLUSION: The specific attributable benefits of BPST cannot be determined from an open trial. However, the BPST therapy was feasible and was successfully delivered according to an operationalized manual. The encouraging outcome indicates the need for a randomized controlled trial of BPST.
-------------------------------------

10010326_234 - 0.916958158544 - science
[parasite, leishmania, drug-resistant, metabolomic, isolate, drug-sensitive, metabolic, drug, clinical, donovanus]

Metabolomics to unveil and understand phenotypic diversity between pathogen populations
Leishmaniasis is a debilitating disease caused by the parasite Leishmania. There is extensive clinical polymorphism, including variable responsiveness to treatment. We study Leishmania donovani parasites isolated from visceral leishmaniasis patients in Nepal that responded differently to antimonial treatment due to differing intrinsic drug sensitivity of the parasites. Here, we present a proof-of-principle study in which we applied a metabolomics pipeline specifically developed for L. donovani to characterize the global metabolic differences between antimonial-sensitive and antimonial-resistant L. donovani isolates. Clones of drug-sensitive and drug-resistant parasite isolates from clinical samples were cultured in vitro and harvested for metabolomics analysis. The relative abundance of 340 metabolites was determined by {ZIC-HILIC} chromatography coupled to {LTQ-Orbitrap} mass spectrometry. Our measurements cover approximately 20\% of the predicted core metabolome of Leishmania and additionally detected a large number of lipids. Drug-sensitive and drug-resistant parasites showed distinct metabolic profiles, and unsupervised clustering and principal component analysis clearly distinguished the two phenotypes. For 100 metabolites, the detected intensity differed more than three-fold between the 2 phenotypes. Many of these were in specific areas of lipid metabolism, suggesting that the membrane composition of the drug-resistant parasites is extensively modified. Untargeted metabolomics has been applied on clinical Leishmania isolates to uncover major metabolic differences between drug-sensitive and drug-resistant isolates. The identified major differences provide novel insights into the mechanisms involved in resistance to antimonial drugs, and facilitate investigations using targeted approaches to unravel the key changes mediating drug resistance. ?? 2010 {t'Kindt} et al.
-------------------------------------

10008144_234 - 0.753254860066 - medicine
[antidepressant, treatment, depression]

Pharmacological Treatment of Unipolar Depression.
Antidepressants were first developed serendipitously 60 years ago and gave rise to the monoamine hypothesis of depression and antidepressant action which has persisted in various forms ever since. Although we have made huge strides in our understanding of the pharmacology of antidepressants, and in the neuroscience of depression, our current antidepressants have changed little since the original drugs. In this chapter I first review some controversies in the use of antidepressant drugs including whether they actually work, and then go on to describe the current state of our clinical use of antidepressants, looking both at the principles and practice of treatment and reviewing the evidence for efficacy, tolerability and safety in acute and sequenced treatments. I finally briefly consider future directions and the aspiration of developing more effective antidepressants.
-------------------------------------

10009581_234 - 0.720207888632 - science
[osteoarthritis, study, chromosome, genome-wide, association, locus, close, patient, arcogen, control]

Identification of new susceptibility loci for osteoarthritis (arcOGEN): a genome-wide association study.
BACKGROUND: Osteoarthritis is the most common form of arthritis worldwide and is a major cause of pain and disability in elderly people. The health economic burden of osteoarthritis is increasing commensurate with obesity prevalence and longevity. Osteoarthritis has a strong genetic component but the success of previous genetic studies has been restricted due to insufficient sample sizes and phenotype heterogeneity. METHODS: We undertook a large genome-wide association study (GWAS) in 7410 unrelated and retrospectively and prospectively selected patients with severe osteoarthritis in the arcOGEN study, 80% of whom had undergone total joint replacement, and 11,009 unrelated controls from the UK. We replicated the most promising signals in an independent set of up to 7473 cases and 42,938 controls, from studies in Iceland, Estonia, the Netherlands, and the UK. All patients and controls were of European descent. FINDINGS: We identified five genome-wide significant loci (binomial test p≤5·0×10(-8)) for association with osteoarthritis and three loci just below this threshold. The strongest association was on chromosome 3 with rs6976 (odds ratio 1·12 95% CI 1·08-1·16; p=7·24×10(-11)), which is in perfect linkage disequilibrium with rs11177. This SNP encodes a missense polymorphism within the nucleostemin-encoding gene GNL3. Levels of nucleostemin were raised in chondrocytes from patients with osteoarthritis in functional studies. Other significant loci were on chromosome 9 close to ASTN2, chromosome 6 between FILIP1 and SENP6, chromosome 12 close to KLHDC5 and PTHLH, and in another region of chromosome 12 close to CHST11. One of the signals close to genome-wide significance was within the FTO gene, which is involved in regulation of bodyweight-a strong risk factor for osteoarthritis. All risk variants were common in frequency and exerted small effects. INTERPRETATION: Our findings provide insight into the genetics of arthritis and identify new pathways that might be amenable to future therapeutic intervention. FUNDING: arcOGEN was funded by a special purpose grant from Arthritis Research UK.
-------------------------------------

10017013_234 - 0.785914864098 - medicine
[treatment, antidementia, drug]

Alzheimer disease: Perceived efficacy of antidementia drug treatment.
Investigators in Germany have solicited the views of neurologists and psychiatrists on the effectiveness of antidementia drug treatments. The study concludes that clinicians generally consider these treatments to be beneficial, and that the provision of support to caregivers seems to further enhance the perceived benefits.
-------------------------------------

10003574_234 - 0.779729237964 - science
[gene, cluster, bialapho, alanylation, step, biosynthetic, productivity]

The bialaphos biosynthetic genes of Streptomyces hygroscopicus: Cloning and analysis of the genes involved in the alanylation step
We have isolated and studied the genes involved in the alanylation step in the biosynthesis of a herbicide, bialaphos which is produced by Streptomyces hygroscopicus. Three bialaphos-nonproducing mutants, NP60, NP61 and NP62, isolated from S. hygroscopicus by treatment with N-methyl-N'-nitro-N-nitrosoguanidine were defective for the alanylation step and were not restored to productivity by any locus of the gene cluster previously cloned. Three plasmids were isolated using NP60, NP61 and NP62 as recipients. The genes which restored productivity to NP61 and NP62 hybridized to the contiguous region of the bialaphos biosynthetic gene cluster. The gene cluster involved in the bialaphos production was about 35 kb long. The gene which restored productivity to NP60 did not hybridize to the bialaphos biosynthetic gene cluster. VM3 and VM4, putative alanylation blocked mutants, were derived from a bialaphos producer by gene replacement of an unidentified region of the biosynthetic gene cluster with an in vitro altered DNA sequence. The genes which restored productivity to VM3 and VM4 were located between the genes which code for phosphinomethylmalic acid synthetase and demethylphosphinothricin acetyltransferase in the cluster. These results suggest that multiple genes are involved in the alanylation step.
-------------------------------------

10005620_234 - 0.778427243121 - medicine
[autonomic, bowel, neuropathy, abdominal, patient, control, pain, distension]

Functional bowel symptoms in diabetes--the role of autonomic neuropathy.
The autonomic nervous system may have a role in the pathogenesis of irritable bowel syndrome. If so, the occurrence of irritable bowel symptomatology in patients with autonomic neuropathy might indicate which, if any, of these symptoms are dependent on autonomic innervation. The prevalence of abdominal pain, abdominal distension and an abnormal bowel habit was recorded in 200 patients with diabetes, screened for autonomic neuropathy, and 200 matched controls. Constipation was significantly more common in patients with autonomic neuropathy than in those without, or controls (22.0% vs 9.2% vs 6.8%). The prevalence of abdominal pain and abdominal distension was no different in patients with and without autonomic neuropathy and their respective controls. The results of this study suggest that control of bowel habit is more dependent on the total integrity of the autonomic nervous system than the perception of pain or the production of distension.
-------------------------------------

10009813_234 - 0.75147415848 - medicine
[fungal, infection, naftifine, patient, skin, study, disease]

Does naftifine have anti-inflammatory properties? A double-blind comparative study with 1% clotrimazole/1% hydrocortisone in clinically diagnosed fungal infection of the skin.
In a multicentre, double-blind, randomized, parallel group study in general practice, 269 patients with clinically diagnosed fungal infection of the skin were treated with either naftifine (Exoderil) or 1% clotrimazole plus 1% hydrocortisone (CHC; Canesten HC) applied twice daily for 4 weeks. Only 115 patients were shown subsequently to have a fungal infection by laboratory tests; the others had inflammatory disease of unknown aetiology. In those with fungal disease, both treatments were equally effective in terms of mycological cure (negative microscopy and culture). Clinical results for all 265 patients showed no clinically identifiable difference between the two preparations in terms of resolution of the disease, indicating that naftifine does have anti-inflammatory activity at least equal to CHC. This study suggests that there is no clinical advantage in treating patients with clinically diagnosed fungal infection of the skin with an antimycotic/corticosteroid combination as opposed to naftifine alone.
-------------------------------------

10006959_234 - 0.771393804452 - science
[node, sinus, human, pacemaker, distribution, heart, right, area, anatomical, atrium]

Computer three-dimensional anatomical reconstruction of the human sinus node and a novel paranodal area.
We have previously shown in rabbit that the pacemaker of the heart (the sinus node) is widespread and matches the wide distribution of the leading pacemaker site within the right atrium. There is, however, uncertainty about the precise location of the pacemaker in human heart, and its spatial relationships with the surrounding right atrial muscle. Therefore, the aim of the current study was to investigate the distribution of the sinus node tissue in a series of healthy human hearts and, for one of the hearts to construct a computer three-dimensional anatomical model of the sinus node, including the likely orientation of myocytes. A combination of experimental techniques--diffusion tensor magnetic resonance imaging (DT-MRI), histology, immunohistochemistry, image processing and computer modelling--was used. Our data show that the sinus node was larger than in previous studies and, most importantly, we identified a previously unknown area running alongside the sinus node (the "paranodal area"), which is even more extensive than the sinus node. This area possesses properties of both nodal and atrial tissues and may have a role in pacemaking. For example, it could explain the wide spread distribution of the leading pacemaker site in human right atrium, a phenomenon known as the wandering pacemaker observed in clinics. In summary, a novel 3D anatomical reconstruction presents a new picture of the distribution of nodal cells within the human right atrium.
-------------------------------------

10006975_234 - 0.819025863396 - science
[receptor, cholesterol, plasma, ligand, g-protein-coupled, nuclear, acid, eadsa, oxysterol]

Analytical strategies for characterization of oxysterol lipidomes: Liver X receptor ligands in plasma.
Bile acids, bile alcohols, and hormonal steroids represent the ultimate biologically active products of cholesterol metabolism in vertebrates. However, intermediates in their formation, including oxysterols and cholestenoic acids, also possess known, e.g., as ligands to nuclear and G-protein-coupled receptors, and unknown regulatory activities. The potential diversity of molecules originating from the cholesterol structure is very broad and their abundance in biological materials ranges over several orders of magnitude. Here we describe the application of enzyme-assisted derivatization for sterol analysis (EADSA) in combination with liquid chromatography-electrospray ionization-mass spectrometry to define the oxysterol and cholestenoic acid metabolomes of human plasma. Quantitative profiling of adult plasma using EADSA leads to the detection of over 30 metabolites derived from cholesterol, some of which are ligands to the nuclear receptors LXR, FXR, and pregnane X receptor or the G-protein-coupled receptor Epstein-Barr virus-induced gene 2. The potential of the EADSA technique in screening for inborn errors of cholesterol metabolism and biosynthesis is demonstrated by the unique plasma profile of patients suffering from cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis. The analytical methods described are easily adapted to the analysis of other biological fluids, including cerebrospinal fluid, and also tissues, e.g., brain, in which nuclear and G-protein-coupled receptors may have important regulatory roles.
-------------------------------------

10015084_234 - 0.790259198028 - science
[gene, rp, experiment, microarray, analysis, technique, datum]

Rank products: A simple, yet powerful, new method to detect differentially regulated genes in replicated microarray experiments
One of the main objectives in the analysis of microarray experiments is the identification of genes that are differentially expressed under two experimental conditions. This task is complicated by the noisiness of the data and the large number of genes that are examined simultaneously. Here, we present a novel technique for identifying differentially expressed genes that does not originate from a sophisticated statistical model but rather from an analysis of biological reasoning. The new technique, which is based on calculating rank products (RP) from replicate experiments, is fast and simple. At the same time, it provides a straightforward and statistically stringent way to determine the significance level for each gene and allows for the flexible control of the false-detection rate and familywise error rate in the multiple testing situation of a microarray experiment. We use the RP technique on three biological data sets and show that in each case it performs more reliably and consistently than the non-parametric t-test variant implemented in Tusher et al.'s significance analysis of microarrays (SAM). We also show that the RP results are reliable in highly noisy data. An analysis of the physiological function of the identified genes indicates that the RP approach is powerful for identifying biologically relevant expression changes. In addition, using RP can lead to a sharp reduction in the number of replicate experiments needed to obtain reproducible results. ?? 2004 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
-------------------------------------

10004312_234 - 0.790843664833 - technology_and_computing
[visualization, binning, grid, datum, system, technique, method, information]

Interactive Grid Based Binning for Information Visualization
Clutter within information visualization (infovis) systems is an area of continuing concern and is receiving increasing research interest. Solutions to the problem vary in their approach, ranging from novel visualizations designed specifically to cope with high data density, through to statistical methodologies such as binning. This paper presents a flexible method that allows interactive placement of a grid based binning system that aims to enhance traditional information visualization techniques. User evaluations employing two specific visualization methods are described using a prototype grid based binning system. The method is shown to be a quick and easy way to visually segment a data domain, while the two visualization techniques presented are shown to provide effective data overview. Due to the abstracted nature of the binning grid, its applicability goes beyond the examples provided in this paper, therefore it could be considered as a generic data reduction and/or overview technique within many systems.
-------------------------------------

10007825_234 - 0.742819527984 - science
[dioxide, carbon, gully, blanket, concentration, times, doc, flux, peat]

Carbon dioxide fluxes and DOC concentrations of eroding blanket peat gullies
Times Cited: 0
-------------------------------------

10018310_234 - 0.852038892096 - science
[inflammation, effector, site, inflammatory, cell]

The therapeutic potential of positive and negative immune cell co-stimulation during inflammation.
Inflammatory cascades are initiated in response to alarm signals that may result from infection, malignant transformation or trauma. Immunity, however, must be controlled; otherwise damage may occur to otherwise healthy tissue within the same microenvironment. Similarly, peripheral tolerance mechanisms must ensure that autoreactive thymic or bone marrow emigrants do not respond upon encounter with the autoantigen. Organized lymphoid structures such as lymph nodes, spleen and Peyer's patches appear to regulate inflammation successfully, displaying controlled expansion and contraction. However, when immune cells flood into effector sites, the organization of T- and B-lymphocytes is lacking. What controls inflammatory cascades in lymph nodes but rarely in effector sites is not clear. We believe the difference lies in the Toll-like receptor ligand load, which is high in effector sites and drives uncontrolled inflammation. Similarly, we believe that initiation of autoimmune inflammation is initiated by the liberation of inflammatory signals due to infection or trauma. In this review, we highlight some of the molecules responsible for maintaining an activated T-cell phenotype, strategies to interrupt these therapeutically and the impact of ligating inhibitory receptors on antigen-presenting cells.
-------------------------------------

10017087_234 - 0.852592964555 - medicine
[psoriasis, treatment, therapy, systemic, biological]

Comparing biological therapies in psoriasis: implications for clinical practice.
Treatment of severe or recalcitrant plaque psoriasis with traditional systemic therapies may be limited by efficacy or safety/tolerability considerations. The latest information on the pathophysiology of psoriasis and its targeted treatment with biological therapy points to an emerging new treatment paradigm: continuous and earlier systemic therapy. However, few comparative trials of systemic treatments for psoriasis have been conducted. The Active Comparator (CNTO 1275/Enbrel) Psoriasis Trial (ACCEPT) is the first head-to-head superiority study comparing two biological agents (ustekinumab and etanercept) in the treatment of plaque psoriasis. The results show that ustekinumab, given as two injections over a 12-week period, achieves significantly superior clinical improvement compared with etanercept 50 mg twice weekly. The level of response was consistent with previously published data for both drugs, and may have important implications for the management of psoriasis.
-------------------------------------

10003961_234 - 0.800521309605 - science
[polymer, behaviour, chain, study]

Controlled synthesis of radiolabelled amine methacrylate water-soluble polymers with end-groups of varying hydrophobicity and studies of adsorption behaviour
The effect of chain end chemistry on the behaviour of poly(2-(diethylamino)ethyl methacrylate) has been studied through the placement of various radioactive groups with increasing hydrophobicity at the chain end of the polymer. Controlled radical polymerisation with (14)C-labelled initiators was used to form polymers of very similar chain length including doubly-labelled, fluorescent-radio polymers. Monitoring and quantification of behaviour was conducted purely using radiotechniques, without the need for fluorescence measurement, showing a clear impact on solid surface adsorption across a range of surface types (filter paper, photographic paper and hair). The studies presented here have clear implications for the study of polymer behaviour through low level fluorescent modification of water-soluble polymers.
-------------------------------------

10009040_234 - 0.880546738396 - science
[protein, mitochondrial, form, ims]

Cytosolic thioredoxin system facilitates the import of mitochondrial small Tim proteins.
Thiol-disulphide redox regulation has a key role during the biogenesis of mitochondrial intermembrane space (IMS) proteins. Only the Cys-reduced form of precursor proteins can be imported into mitochondria, which is followed by disulphide bond formation in the mitochondrial IMS. In contrast to the wealth of knowledge on the oxidation process inside mitochondria, little is known about how precursors are maintained in an import-competent form in the cytosol. Here we provide the first evidence that the cytosolic thioredoxin system is required to maintain the IMS small Tim proteins in reduced forms and facilitate their mitochondrial import during respiratory growth.
-------------------------------------

10009783_234 - 0.701976416925 - technology_and_computing
[simulation, behaviour, process, theory, outcome, variable, control, blood, manipulation]

Use of mental simulations to change theory of planned behaviour variables.
OBJECTIVES: The predictive validity of the theory of planned behaviour is well established, but much less is known about: (a) whether there are causal relationships between key components of the model and (b) how to go about changing the theory of planned behaviour variables. This study tested the ability of outcome and process simulations to change variables specified in the theory of planned behaviour in relation to blood donation. DESIGN: Participants (N=146) were randomized to one of four conditions: outcome simulation only, process simulation only, process-plus-outcome simulation and a distractor control condition. The dependent variables were state anxiety, and intention attitude, subjective norm and perceived control from the theory of planned behaviour. METHODS: Participants were asked to empty their mind and visualize themselves: (a) after donating blood (outcome manipulation), (b) preparing to donate blood (process manipulation), (c) both preparing to donate blood and after having donated blood (process-plus-outcome manipulation) or (d) both preparing to get a high mark and after having got a high mark on their course (control condition). Following mental rehearsal, participants completed the dependent variables. RESULTS: There were no main effects of outcome simulation, but process simulation successfully increased intention, subjective norm and perceived control. There was also a significant outcome simulation x process simulation interaction for attitude. The effect of the process manipulation on intention was mediated by subjective norm and perceived control. CONCLUSIONS: The findings show promise for the use of mental simulations in changing cognitions and further research is required to extend the present findings to other health behaviours.
-------------------------------------

10018380_234 - 0.804458311003 - science
[innate, cell, immune, immunity]

Structured regulation of inflammation during respiratory viral infection.
Innate immune cells including macrophages, dendritic cells, and granulocytes are resident within or patrol very different microenvironments in the host. Their activity or responsiveness to antigen is dictated by site-specific factors. Because of the constant exposure to environmental antigens and commensal microorganisms, mucosal immunity needs to be more constrained than peripheral counterparts to prevent unnecessary inflammation. The epithelial surfaces that dominate all mucosal tissues provide an ideal regulator since innate immune cells are often in intimate contact with, or lie immediately beneath, them and a breach in epithelial integrity would signal a damaging event and release innate immunity from their influence. We discuss the role of the respiratory epithelium in raising the threshold of innate immune cell activation at homoeostasis, how its absence triggers innate immunity, and how inflammatory resolution often produces an altered homoeostatic environment that can affect the next inflammatory event at this site.
-------------------------------------

10005791_234 - 0.782979119872 - technology_and_computing
[system, nonlinear, constraint, portfolio, belief, optimisation]

Belief rule-based system for portfolio optimisation with nonlinear cash-flows and constraints
A belief rule-based (BRB) system is a generic nonlinear modelling and inference scheme. It is based on the concept of belief structures and evidential reasoning (ER), and has been shown to be capable of capturing complicated nonlinear causal relationships between antecedent attributes and consequents. The aim of this paper is to develop a BRB system that complements the RiskMetrics WealthBench system for portfolio optimisation with nonlinear cash-flows and constraints. Two optimisation methods are presented to locate efficient portfolios under different constraints specified by the investors. Numerical studies demonstrate the effectiveness and efficiency of the proposed methodology.
-------------------------------------

10017114_234 - 0.820217248476 - medicine
[treatment, study, patient, follow-up, month, ipl, change, telangiectase]

Pilot study of intense pulsed light for the treatment of systemic sclerosis-related telangiectases.
BACKGROUND: Telangiectases represent microvascular changes inherent in the systemic sclerosis (SSc) disease process. Intense pulsed light (IPL) is an effective treatment for non-SSc-related cutaneous telangiectases. OBJECTIVES: This pilot study aimed to examine the efficacy, safety and tolerability of IPL treatment in an open study of patients with SSc. METHODS: Patients underwent three treatments of IPL at monthly intervals and attended follow-up examinations at 1, 6 and 12 months after final treatment. Photographs, laser Doppler imaging (LDI) and thermography were used to measure changes at each visit. RESULTS: Seventeen patients completed the study. Photographs were graded (compared with baseline) as: at 1-month follow-up, four 'no change', four 'improved' and eight 'much improved'; at 6-month follow-up, four 'no change', eight 'improved'; and four 'much improved'; and at 12-month follow-up (eight images were available), three 'no change', two 'improved' and three 'much improved'. Perfusion as measured by LDI (perfusion units) was significantly reduced, compared with baseline median 2·66, interquartile range (1·78-3·93), at 1 month 1·70 (1·07-2·55), P = 0·006 and 6 months 2·05 (1·42-2·36), P = 0·008 post-treatment, but not at 12 months 1·61 (1·14-3·22), P =0·088. No differences were found in skin temperature between baseline and follow-up visits. CONCLUSIONS: In this pilot study (the first of IPL treatment for SSc-related telangiectases) most patients improved after IPL treatment. However, the degree of improvement was not maintained in all patients at 6-12 months, suggesting that further treatments may be necessary. Longer term studies of this novel treatment approach are now required.
-------------------------------------

10011636_234 - 0.797099006325 - science
[rna, dna, molecule]

Splint ligation of RNA with t4 DNA ligase.
Splint ligation of RNA, whereby specific RNA molecules are ligated together, can be carried out using T4 DNA ligase and a bridging DNA oligonucleotide complementary to the RNAs. This method takes advantage of the property of T4 DNA ligase to join RNA molecules when they are in an RNA:DNA hybrid. Splint ligation is a useful tool for the introduction of modified nucleotides into RNA molecules, insertion of a radiolabel into a specific position within an RNA and for the assembly of smaller synthetic RNAs into longer RNA molecules. Such modifications enable a wide range of experiments to be carried out with the modified RNA including structural studies, co-immunoprecipitations, and the ability to map sites of RNA:RNA and RNA:protein interactions.
-------------------------------------

10008606_234 - 0.852814574776 - science
[epidermal, cytokine, lc, role, cell, skin, contact, sensitization, chemical]

Epidermal cytokines in contact hypersensitivity: Immunological roles and practical applications.
Local trauma and topical exposure to sensitizing chemicals induces the production by epidermal cells of a variety of cytokines including interleukins 1 (alpha and beta), 6, 8 and 10 (IL-1alpha, IL-1beta, IL-6, IL-8 and IL-10), granulocyte/macrophage colony-stimulating factor and tumour necrosis factor alpha. There is mounting evidence that keratinocyte-derived cytokines play a role of some importance in cutaneous immune responses and the development of contact sensitization. The induction phase of contact sensitization is dependent upon the action of epidermal Langerhans cells (LC). Following epicutaneous exposure to skin sensitizing chemicals LC are induced to migrate via afferent lymphatics to the draining lymph nodes. During migration, or shortly following arrival in the nodes, LC acquire the characteristics of lymphoid dendritic cells. This functional maturation is accompanied by elevated expression of MHC class II (Ia) antigens and of intercellular adhesion molecule-1 (ICAM-1). Increased expression of ICAM-1 and Ia facilitates the interaction with, and stimulation of, T lymphocytes by dendritic cells. The role epidermal cytokines play in this process is described. Characterization of the role epidermal cytokines play in regulating LC function may allow not only clarification of the molecular events which initiate skin sensitization, but also provide opportunities to investigate in vitro the consequences of the interaction of chemical allergens with the skin.
-------------------------------------

10003675_234 - 0.8697045621 - science
[surface, line, gradient]

On Calculating surface Potential Gradient of Overhead Line Conductors
The surface potential gradient is a critical designparameter for planning overhead lines, as it determines the levelof corona loss (CL), radio interference (RI), and audible noise(AN). The majority of existing models for surface gradientcalculation are based on analytical methods which restrict theirapplication in simulating complex surface geometry. This articleproposes a novel method which utilizes both analytical andnumerical procedures to predict the surface gradient. One of UKNational Grid's transmission line configurations has beenselected as an example to compare the results for differentmethods. The different stranding shapes are a key variable indetermining dry surface fields.
-------------------------------------

10007325_234 - 0.795116257645 - science
[adiponectin, novel, level, risk, metabolic, locus, trait, t2d]

Novel loci for adiponectin levels and their influence on type 2 diabetes and metabolic traits: a multi-ethnic meta-analysis of 45,891 individuals.
Circulating levels of adiponectin, a hormone produced predominantly by adipocytes, are highly heritable and are inversely associated with type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2D) and other metabolic traits. We conducted a meta-analysis of genome-wide association studies in 39,883 individuals of European ancestry to identify genes associated with metabolic disease. We identified 8 novel loci associated with adiponectin levels and confirmed 2 previously reported loci (P = 4.5×10(-8)-1.2×10(-43)). Using a novel method to combine data across ethnicities (N = 4,232 African Americans, N = 1,776 Asians, and N = 29,347 Europeans), we identified two additional novel loci. Expression analyses of 436 human adipocyte samples revealed that mRNA levels of 18 genes at candidate regions were associated with adiponectin concentrations after accounting for multiple testing (p<3×10(-4)). We next developed a multi-SNP genotypic risk score to test the association of adiponectin decreasing risk alleles on metabolic traits and diseases using consortia-level meta-analytic data. This risk score was associated with increased risk of T2D (p = 4.3×10(-3), n = 22,044), increased triglycerides (p = 2.6×10(-14), n = 93,440), increased waist-to-hip ratio (p = 1.8×10(-5), n = 77,167), increased glucose two hours post oral glucose tolerance testing (p = 4.4×10(-3), n = 15,234), increased fasting insulin (p = 0.015, n = 48,238), but with lower in HDL-cholesterol concentrations (p = 4.5×10(-13), n = 96,748) and decreased BMI (p = 1.4×10(-4), n = 121,335). These findings identify novel genetic determinants of adiponectin levels, which, taken together, influence risk of T2D and markers of insulin resistance.
-------------------------------------

10009454_234 - 0.957286819768 - medicine
[treatment, medication, patient, antipsychotic, noncompliance, illness, psychosis, mistrust, positive, symptom]

Beyond the Usual Suspects: Positive Attitudes Towards Positive Symptoms Is Associated With Medication Noncompliance in Psychosis.
Antipsychotic medication represents the treatment of choice in psychosis according to clinical guidelines. Nevertheless, studies show that half to almost three-quarter of all patients discontinue medication with antipsychotics after some time, a fact which is traditionally ascribed to side-effects, mistrust against the clinician and poor illness insight. The present study investigated whether positive attitudes toward psychotic symptoms (ie, gain from illness) represent a further factor for medication noncompliance. An anonymous online survey was set up in order to prevent conservative response biases that likely emerge in a clinical setting. Following an iterative selection process, data from a total of 113 patients with a likely diagnosis of schizophrenia and a history of antipsychotic treatment were retained for the final analyses (80%). While side-effect profile and mistrust emerged as the most frequent reasons for drug discontinuation, 28% of the sample reported gain from illness (eg, missing voices, feeling of power) as a motive for noncompliance. At least every fourth patient reported the following reasons: stigma (31%), mistrust against the physician/therapist (31%), and rejection of medication in general (28%). Approximately every fifth patient had discontinued antipsychotic treatment because of forgetfulness. On average, patients provided 4 different explanations for noncompliance. Ambivalence toward symptoms and treatment should thoroughly be considered when planning treatment in psychosis. While antipsychotic medication represents the evidence-based cornerstone of the current treatment in schizophrenia, further research is needed on nonpharmacological interventions for noncompliant patients who are willing to undergo intervention but refuse pharmacotherapy.
-------------------------------------

10011792_234 - 0.86844695559 - science
[dimensions, times, mandibular, variation, corpus, hominid, cited, reappraisal]

A REAPPRAISAL OF VARIATION IN HOMINID MANDIBULAR CORPUS DIMENSIONS
Times Cited: 31
-------------------------------------

10005563_234 - 0.953220564387 - medicine
[asthma, abpa, patient, abpm, severe, ige, saf, antifungal, fumigatus, persistent]

Fungi and allergic lower respiratory tract diseases.
Asthma is a common disorder that in 2009 afflicted 8.2% of adults                        and children, 24.6 million persons, in the United States. In patients with                        moderate and severe persistent asthma, there is significantly increased                        morbidity, use of health care support, and health care costs. Epidemiologic                        studies in the United States and Europe have associated mold sensitivity,                        particularly to Alternaria alternata and Cladosporium herbarum, with the                        development, persistence, and severity of asthma. In addition, sensitivity                        to Aspergillus fumigatus has been associated with severe persistent asthma                        in adults. Allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis (ABPA) is caused by A                        fumigatus and is characterized by exacerbations of asthma, recurrent                        transient chest radiographic infiltrates, coughing up thick mucus plugs,                        peripheral and pulmonary eosinophilia, and increased total serum IgE and                        fungus-specific IgE levels, especially during exacerbation. The airways                        appear to be chronically or intermittently colonized by A fumigatus in                        patients with ABPA. ABPA is the most common form of allergic                        bronchopulmonary mycosis (ABPM); other fungi, including Candida,                        Penicillium, and Curvularia species, are implicated. The characteristics of                        ABPM include severe asthma, eosinophilia, markedly increased total IgE and                        specific IgE levels, bronchiectasis, and mold colonization of the airways.                        The term severe asthma associated with fungal sensitization (SAFS) has been                        coined to illustrate the high rate of fungal sensitivity in patients with                        persistent severe asthma and improvement with antifungal treatment. The                        immunopathology of ABPA, ABPM, and SAFS is incompletely understood. Genetic                        risks identified in patients with ABPA include HLA association and certain                        T(H)2-prominent and cystic fibrosis variants, but these have not been                        studied in patients with ABPM and SAFS. Oral corticosteroid and antifungal                        therapies appear to be partially successful in patients with ABPA. However,                        the role of antifungal and immunomodulating therapies in patients with ABPA,                        ABPM, and SAFS requires additional larger studies.
-------------------------------------

10018368_234 - 0.822963432438 - science
[rsv, ctl, cd8, mucosal, peptide, viral, response, mouse, clearance, adjuvant]

Mucosal delivery of a respiratory syncytial virus CTL peptide with enterotoxin-based adjuvants elicits protective, immunopathogenic, and immunoregulatory antiviral CD8+ T cell responses.
In an effort to develop a safe and effective vaccine against respiratory syncytial virus (RSV), we used Escherichia coli heat-labile toxin (LT), and LTK63 (an LT mutant devoid of ADP-ribosyltransferase activity) to elicit murine CD8(+) CTL responses to an intranasally codelivered CTL peptide from the second matrix protein (M2) of RSV. M2(82-90)-specific CD8(+) T cells were detected by IFN-gamma enzyme-linked immunospot and (51)Cr release assay in local and systemic lymph nodes, and their induction was dependent on the use of a mucosal adjuvant. CTL elicited by peptide immunization afforded protection against RSV challenge, but also enhanced weight loss. CTL-mediated viral clearance was not dependent on IFN-gamma since depletion using specific mAb during RSV challenge did not affect cellular recruitment or viral clearance. Depletion of IFN-gamma did, however, reduce the concentration of TNF detected in lung homogenates of challenged mice and largely prevented the weight loss associated with CTL-mediated viral clearance. Mice primed with the attachment glycoprotein (G) develop lung eosinophilia after intranasal RSV challenge. Mucosal peptide vaccination reduced pulmonary eosinophilia in mice subsequently immunized with G and challenged with RSV. These studies emphasize that protective and immunoregulatory CD8(+) CTL responses can be mucosally elicited using enterotoxin-based mucosal adjuvants but that resistance against viral infection may be accompanied by enhanced disease.
-------------------------------------

10008948_234 - 0.733187596391 - science
[rod, cone, retinal, mouse, central, disease, human, mutation, degeneration, pattern]

RPGR-associated retinal degeneration in human X-linked RP and a murine model.
PURPOSE: We investigated the retinal disease due to mutations in the retinitispigmentosa GTPase regulator (RPGR) gene in human patients and in an Rpgrconditional knockout (cko) mouse model.METHODS: XLRP patients with RPGR-ORF15 mutations (n = 35, ages at first visit5-72 years) had clinical examinations, and rod and cone perimetry. Rpgr-cko mice,in which the proximal promoter and first exon were deleted ubiquitously, wereback-crossed onto a BALB/c background, and studied with optical coherencetomography and electroretinography (ERG). Retinal histopathology was performed on a subset.RESULTS: Different patterns of rod and cone dysfunction were present in patients.Frequently, there were midperipheral losses with residual rod and cone functionin central and peripheral retina. Longitudinal data indicated that central rodloss preceded peripheral rod losses. Central cone-only vision with no peripheral function was a late stage. Less commonly, patients had central rod and conedysfunction, but preserved, albeit abnormal, midperipheral rod and cone vision.Rpgr-cko mice had progressive retinal degeneration detectable in the first monthsof life. ERGs indicated relatively equal rod and cone disease. At late stages,there was greater inferior versus superior retinal degeneration.CONCLUSIONS: RPGR mutations lead to progressive loss of rod and cone vision, but show different patterns of residual photoreceptor disease expression. Knowledge of the patterns should guide treatment strategies. Rpgr-cko mice had onset of degeneration at relatively young ages and progressive photoreceptor disease. The natural history in this model will permit preclinical proof-of-concept studies to be designed and such studies should advance progress toward human therapy.
-------------------------------------

10011839_234 - 0.812139037012 - medicine
[psoriatic, factor, tumour, therapy, inhibitor, arthritis, psoriasis, necrosis, spondyloarthritis, biologic]

Unmasking of axial spondyloarthritis and oligoarthritis following discontinuation of tumour necrosis factor inhibitor therapy for psoriasis.
Psoriatic arthritis remains a common cause of morbidity in patients with psoriasis. Little is known about the natural history of the disease and dermatologists do not consistently screen for its presence. We describe a patient with severe psoriasis where long-term biologic therapy with a tumour necrosis factor inhibitor was interrupted for clinical reasons, leading to a rapidly evolving axial spondyloarthritis and oligoarthritis. This unusual presentation of psoriatic arthritis may reflect masking of the disease by long-term treatment with a tumour necrosis factor inhibitor. We advocate the use of screening for psoriatic arthritis, including before and during treatment with biologic therapies.
-------------------------------------

10009026_234 - 0.906488982762 - science
[vitro, vivo, times, biochemistry, metabolism, enzyme, understood, kinetics, revisited]

Testing Biochemistry Revisited: How In Vivo Metabolism Can Be Understood from In Vitro Enzyme Kinetics
Times Cited: 1
-------------------------------------

10010340_234 - 0.791556049666 - science
[gene, cpk, cluster, abcpk, novel, scbr2, ycpk, deletion]

Deletion of a regulatory gene within the cpk gene cluster reveals novel antibacterial activity in Streptomyces coelicolor A3(2)
Genome sequencing of Streptomyces coelicolor A3(2) revealed an uncharacterized type I polyketide synthase gene cluster (cpk). Here we describe the discovery of a novel antibacterial activity (abCPK) and a yellow-pigmented secondary metabolite (yCPK) after deleting a presumed pathway-specific regulatory gene (scbR2) that encodes a member of the ??-butyrolactone receptor family of proteins and which lies in the cpk gene cluster. Overproduction of yCPK and abCPK in a scbR2 deletion mutant, and the absence of the newly described compounds from cpk deletion mutants, suggest that they are products of the previously orphan cpk biosynthetic pathway in which abCPK is converted into the yellow pigment. Transcriptional analysis suggests that scbR2 may act in a negative feedback mechanism to eventually limit yCPK biosynthesis. The results described here represent a novel approach for the discovery of new, biologically active compounds. ?? 2010 SGM.
-------------------------------------

10005291_234 - 0.76725201094 - medicine
[scar, psychosocial, severity, distress, patient, dlqi, das24]

Skin scar preconceptions must be challenged: importance of self-perception in skin scarring.
Greater objective scar severity and visibility should intuitively cause greater psychosocial distress for patients. Previous research is contradictory and has employed non-validated scar severity measures whilst neglecting patient-rated severity. The aim of this study was to assess the effects of objective and patient-rated scar severity, scar type and location on psychosocial distress. Skin scars were quantitatively assessed on two independent occasions using the 'Manchester Scar Scale' (MSS) - a validated measure. Scars were scored twice independently. Patients also rated their scars (from 'very good' zero to 'poor' four) and good completed the Derriford Appearance Scale (DAS24) and Dermatology Life Quality Index (DLQI). Eighty-two patients, with an average+/-SD (range) age of 34+/-15 (16-65) years were recruited. Mean psychosocial questionnaire scores were: DAS24 45.5+/-17.8 (15-91); DLQI 7.5+/-6.7 (0-26). Participants had 1.9+/-1.5 (1-8) scars with an MSS score of 31.3+/-24.0 (6.6-162.0) and subjective score of 2.6+/-1.2 (0-4). Correlation between psychosocial distress and objective severity was not significant (DAS24 0.14 p=0.11; DLQI 0.16 p=0.06). Correlation between psychosocial distress and subjective severity was significant (DAS24 0.48 p<0.0001; DLQI 0.46 p<0.0001). Patients with non-visible scars experienced greater psychosocial distress than patients with visible scars (DAS24 9.7 p=0.046; DLQI 4.2 p=0.014). Scar type was unrelated to psychosocial distress. Patient-rated scar severity and scar visibility are correlated with psychosocial distress rather than clinician's objective severity rating or scar type. Although counter-intuitive, results are consistent with research into other disfiguring conditions and patient self-assessment should therefore form an integral part of clinical assessment.
-------------------------------------

10003990_234 - 0.714395686326 - science
[pain, cwp, variant, genetic, association]

Genome-wide association study meta-analysis of chronic widespread pain: evidence for involvement of the 5p15.2 region.
BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Chronic widespread pain (CWP) is a common disorder affecting ∼10% of the general population and has an estimated heritability of 48-52%. In the first large-scale genome-wide association study (GWAS) meta-analysis, we aimed to identify common genetic variants associated with CWP. METHODS: We conducted a GWAS meta-analysis in 1308 female CWP cases and 5791 controls of European descent, and replicated the effects of the genetic variants with suggestive evidence for association in 1480 CWP cases and 7989 controls. Subsequently, we studied gene expression levels of the nearest genes in two chronic inflammatory pain mouse models, and examined 92 genetic variants previously described associated with pain. RESULTS: The minor C-allele of rs13361160 on chromosome 5p15.2, located upstream of chaperonin-containing-TCP1-complex-5 gene (CCT5) and downstream of FAM173B, was found to be associated with a 30% higher risk of CWP (minor allele frequency=43%; OR=1.30, 95% CI 1.19 to 1.42, p=1.2×10(-8)). Combined with the replication, we observed a slightly attenuated OR of 1.17 (95% CI 1.10 to 1.24, p=4.7×10(-7)) with moderate heterogeneity (I2=28.4%). However, in a sensitivity analysis that only allowed studies with joint-specific pain, the combined association was genome-wide significant (OR=1.23, 95% CI 1.14 to 1.32, p=3.4×10(-8), I2=0%). Expression levels of Cct5 and Fam173b in mice with inflammatory pain were higher in the lumbar spinal cord, not in the lumbar dorsal root ganglions, compared to mice without pain. None of the 92 genetic variants previously described were significantly associated with pain (p>7.7×10(-4)). CONCLUSIONS: We identified a common genetic variant on chromosome 5p15.2 associated with joint-specific CWP in humans. This work suggests that CCT5 and FAM173B are promising targets in the regulation of pain.
-------------------------------------

10003461_234 - 0.74750667215 - science
[neuronal]

Artifact versus reality--how astrocytes contribute to synaptic events.
The neuronal doctrine, developed a century ago regards neuronal networks as the sole substrate of higher brain function. Recent advances in glial physiology have promoted an alternative hypothesis, which places information processing in the brain into integrated neuronal-glial networks utilizing both binary (neuronal action potentials) and analogue (diffusional propagation of second messengers/metabolites through gap junctions or transmitters through the interstitial space) signal encoding. It has been proposed that the feed-forward and feed-back communication between these two types of neural cells, which underlies information transfer and processing, is accomplished by the release of neurotransmitters from neuronal terminals as well as from astroglial processes. Understanding of this subject, however, remains incomplete and important questions and controversies require resolution. Here we propose that the primary function of perisynaptic glial processes is to create an "astroglial cradle" that shields the synapse from a multitude of extrasynaptic signaling events and provides for multifaceted support and long-term plasticity of synaptic contacts through variety of mechanisms, which may not necessarily involve the release of "glio" transmitters.
-------------------------------------

10017772_234 - 0.945341305302 - science
[substrate, chimeric, biocatalyst, self-sufficient]

Chimeric Self-Sufficient P450cam-RhFRed Biocatalysts with Broad Substrate Scope
A high-throughput screening protocol for evaluating chimeric, self-sufficient P450 biocatalysts and their mutants against a panel of substrates was developed, leading to the identification of a number of novel biooxidation activities
-------------------------------------

10018352_234 - 0.708009420495 - science
[cell, lung, ox40, immune]

A critical role for OX40 in T cell-mediated immunopathology during lung viral infection.
Respiratory infections are the third leading cause of death worldwide. Illness is caused by pathogen replication and disruption of airway homeostasis by excessive expansion of cell numbers. One strategy to prevent lung immune-mediated damage involves reducing the cellular burden. To date, antiinflammatory strategies have affected both antigen-specific and naive immune repertoires. Here we report a novel form of immune intervention that specifically targets recently activated T cells alone. OX40 (CD134) is absent on naive T cells but up-regulated 1-2 d after antigen activation. OX40-immunoglobulin fusion proteins block the interaction of OX40 with its ligand on antigen-presenting cells and eliminate weight loss and cachexia without preventing virus clearance. Reduced proliferation and enhanced apoptosis of lung cells accompanied the improved clinical phenotype. Manipulation of this late costimulatory pathway has clear therapeutic potential for the treatment of dysregulated lung immune responses.
-------------------------------------

10017085_234 - 0.768498185721 - science
[susceptibility, psoriasis, response, genetic, psoriatic, disease, locus, arthritis, study, treatment]

Genetic susceptibility to psoriasis and psoriatic arthritis: implications for therapy.
The era of genome-wide association studies has revolutionized the search for genetic susceptibility loci in complex genetic conditions such as psoriasis. There are currently 16 loci with confirmed evidence for association with psoriasis susceptibility but there is the potential for more to be discovered as the genetic heritability of the disease has not yet been fully explained. Many of the associated loci overlap with those for psoriatic arthritis. In contrast to psoriasis susceptibility, few studies have been performed to identify predictors of drug response in psoriasis. As large-scale collaborations and registries for psoriasis and psoriatic arthritis are established, it is likely that a genome-wide approach may be used as a more effective method of searching for genetic predictors of treatment response. However, candidate gene studies will still have a role; for example, it is likely that some disease susceptibility genes will also be markers of treatment response, based on evidence from other diseases. This review summarizes recent advances in investigating the role genetics plays in psoriasis susceptibility and contrasts these to advances made in psoriatic arthritis. Further, it describes the genetics of treatment response in the two diseases and indicates how susceptibility loci could be used to identify drug response in the future.
-------------------------------------

10003648_234 - 0.722116249466 - medicine
[depression, rating, montgomery-asberg, nurse, patient, scale, predictive, stroke, value, study]

Can nurses help identify patients with depression following stroke? A pilot study using two methods of detection.
AIM: This paper reports a study to determine the accuracy of the Geriatric Mental State examination and the Montgomery-Asberg Depression Rating Scale, when administered by a nurse, in detecting depression in patients who have recently had a stroke. BACKGROUND: After a stroke, survivors spend considerable amounts of time in the direct care of nurses. Many show signs of depression, and this has been associated with an adverse effect on recovery and rehabilitation. Identifying those with depression when they have communication and cognitive difficulties is especially difficult. Treatments are available to assist in the management of depression, and early detection and intervention may assist in this process. METHOD: A cross-sectional pilot study was conducted, comparing (a) clinical diagnosis of depression by a psychiatrist with (b) two clinical interviews, using the Geriatric Mental State examination and the Montgomery-Asberg Depression Rating Scale, conducted by a nurse. The data were collected in 2002. FINDINGS: Twenty-eight patients, who were still in hospital in the second week poststroke, were included. The median age was 72 (interquartile range: 61-78). There were 14 males. The psychiatrist rated seven (25%) patients as depressed. The Geriatric Mental State examination had a sensitivity of 71%, a specificity of 67%, a positive predictive value of 42%, a negative predictive value of 88% in detecting depression and an overall efficiency of 68%. The Montgomery-Asberg Depression Rating Scale had a sensitivity of 100%, a specificity of 65%, a positive predictive value of 54%, a negative predictive value of 100% and an overall efficiency of 75%. CONCLUSION: In this study, the Geriatric Mental State examination and the Montgomery-Asberg Depression Rating Scale were at least as efficient at detecting the depression in patients who have had a stroke. However, as the Montgomery-Asberg Depression Rating Scale is quicker to administer, it may prove more useful to nurses clinically.
-------------------------------------

10006918_234 - 0.903926966871 - science
[polymer, pile, effect, fluid, support, trial]

Effect of support fluids on pile performance - a field trial in east London
Synthetic polymer support fluids have been used in the UK for about a decade, although naturally derived polymers such as xanthan gum have been used for much longer. Very little research has been carried out to assess the effects of polymer fluids and especially synthetic polymers on pile performance.A field trial comprising the construction and testing of three piles has been carried out at Stratford in east London. The objectives of the trial were to compare the effects of polymer and bentonite support fluids on pile performance, to assess the effect of extended bore open time for the polymer piles, and to quantify the effect of support fluid contamination on the hardened properties of concrete. It was found that the two polymer piles significantly outperformed the bentonite pile under the maximum proof load, and that no adverse effect was caused by the extended soil-fluid exposure time in the polymer-supported bore. The two support fluids were also found to have similar effects on concrete quality.
-------------------------------------

10009340_234 - 0.818342040609 - science
[p21cip1, metastasis, cell, proliferation, invasion]

p21CIP1 mediates reciprocal switching between proliferation and invasion during metastasis.
Cell proliferation and invasion are critical for malignant progression, yet how these processes relate to each other and whether they regulate one another during metastasis is unknown. We show that invasiveness of breast cancer cells is associated with growth arrest due to p21CIP1 upregulation. Knockdown of p21CIP1 increases cell proliferation and suppresses invasion. Since p21CIP1 acts to inhibit cyclin E during cell-cycle progression, we demonstrated that a constitutively active form of cyclin E had similar effects to p21CIP1 inhibition resulting in enhanced cell growth and suppressed invasiveness. We tested these findings in vivo in the Polyoma middle T mammary tumor model in which p21CIP1 was deleted. p21CIP1 knockout mice exhibited dramatic suppression of metastasis, independent of tumor growth, which was rescued by p21CIP1. Metastasis suppression by p21CIP1 ablation was associated with striking cytoskeletal reorganization leading to a non-invasive and highly proliferative state. Thus, p21CIP1 regulates metastasis by mediating reciprocal switching between invasion and proliferation.
-------------------------------------

10008705_234 - 0.913229695086 - medicine
[lymphoma, patient, biomarker, chemotherapy, ndna, toxicity, potential, response, treatment, utility]

Assessment of circulating biomarkers for potential pharmacodynamic utility in patients with lymphoma.
PURPOSE: Treatment efficacy and toxicity are difficult to predict in lymphoma patients. In this study, the utility of circulating biomarkers in predicting and/or monitoring treatment efficacy/toxicity were investigated. PATIENTS AND METHODS: Circulating biomarkers of cell death (nucleosomal DNA (nDNA) and cytokeratin 18 (CK18)), and circulating FLT3 ligand, a potential biomarker of myelosuppression, were assessed before and serially after standard chemotherapy in 49 patients with Hodgkin and non-Hodgkin lymphoma. Cytokeratin 18 is not expressed in lymphoma cells so is a potential biomarker of epithelial toxicity in this setting. Tumour response was assessed before and after completion of chemotherapy by 2D and 3D computed tomography radiological response. RESULTS: Baseline nDNA level was significantly higher in all lymphoma subtypes compared with 61 healthy controls and was prognostic for progression-free survival in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL). Decreases in nDNA levels were observed in the first week after chemotherapy; in FL, early falls in nDNA predicted for long remission following therapy. In DLBCL, elevations in nDNA occurred in cases with progressive disease. Circulating CK18 increased within 48 h of chemotherapy and was significantly higher in patients experiencing epithelial toxicity graded >3 by Common Terminology for Classification of Adverse Events criteria. FLT3 ligand was elevated within 3-8 days of chemotherapy initiation and predicted those patients who subsequently developed neutropenic sepsis. CONCLUSION: These data suggest circulating biomarkers contribute useful information regarding tumour response and toxicity in patients receiving standard chemotherapy and have potential utility in the development of individualised treatment approaches in lymphoma. These biomarkers are now being tested within multicentre phase III trials to progress their qualification.
-------------------------------------

10009641_234 - 0.878032093463 - medicine
[period, ependymoma, patient, west, age, time, surgical, north, survival, resection]

Ependymoma in children: surgical treatment, technological advances and outcomes over a 55-year period in North West England
Ependymoma in children: surgical treatment, technological advances and outcomes over a 55-year period in North West EnglandObjective: Surgical resection has always been the mainstay management for childhood ependymoma, with the use of adjuvant therapies advocated according to patient age. We aimed to evaluate the influence of new technologies and the re-organisation of paediatric neurosurgical services on survival outcomes.Study design: The patient list and tumour type was obtained from the North West Tumour Registry between January 1954 and December 2008. The patient’s case notes were retrospectively analysed. Subgroup univariate and multivariate analysis was performed for time period, extent of resection, location and age. Survival between subgroups was tested for significance using the log-rank test. Demographics: 129 patients were obtained from the registry with a histological diagnosis of ependymoma. The age ranged from 3.5 months to 182.5 months (15 years) with a mean age at presentation of 5.5years. The male to female ratio was 0.9:1.Results:Patients were stratified into five 11-year time periods from 1954 – 2008 according to their date of diagnosis. 5-year overall survival improved significantly from 20% to 71% for children diagnosed between 1954-1964 and 1998-2008 respectively. 5-year progression free survival also improved significantly, this was most pronounced for the latter time periods. This trend was also mirrored by the gross total resection rate which for the latter time periods increased substantially from 20% to 57%.Conclusion:We advocate that the introduction of new surgical technologies and amalgamation on paediatric neurosurgical services in North West England has led to improvements in ependymoma gross total resection rates and PFS.
-------------------------------------

10004829_234 - 0.787133421504 - food_and_drink
[water, swallow, temperature, carbonation, cold, experiment]

Examining the Role of Carbonation and Temperature on Water Swallowing Performance: A Swallowing Reaction-Time Study.
Various therapeutic approaches for dysphagia management are based on modifications of bolus properties to change swallowing biomechanics and increase swallowing safety. Limited evidence exists for the effects of carbonation and bolus temperature on swallowing behavior. Here, we investigated the effects of carbonation and temperature on swallowing behavior using a novel automated and complex swallowing reaction time task via pressure signal recordings in the hypopharynx. Healthy participants (n = 39, 27.7±5 years old) were randomized in two different experiments and asked to perform 10 normal-paced swallows, 10 fast-paced swallows, and 10 challenged swallows within a predetermined time-window of carbonated versus still water (experiment 1) and of cold (4 °C) versus hot (45 °C) versus room temperature (21 °C) water (experiment 2). Quantitative measurements of latencies and percentage of successful challenged swallows were collected and analyzed nonparametrically. An increase in successfully performed challenged swallowing task was observed with carbonated water versus still water (P = 0.021), whereas only cold water shortened the latencies of normally paced swallows compared with room (P = 0.001) and hot (P = 0.004) temperatures. Therefore, it appears that chemothermal stimulation with carbonation and cold are most effective at modulating water swallowing, which in part is likely to be driven by central swallowing afferent activity.
-------------------------------------

10009684_234 - 0.892151023389 - science
[jnk, apoptotic, bax]

The regulation of Bax by c-Jun N-terminal protein kinase (JNK) is a prerequisite to the mitochondrial-induced apoptotic pathway.
The signaling mechanism by which JNK affects mitochondria is critical to initiate apoptosis. Here we show that the absence of JNK provides a partial resistance to the toxic effect of the heavy metal cadmium. Both wild type and jnk-/- fibroblasts undergoing death exhibit cytosolic cytochrome c but, unlike wild type cells, the JNK-deficient fibroblasts do not display increased caspase activity and DNA fragmentation. The absence of apoptotic death correlates with a specific defect in activation of Bax. We conclude that JNK-dependent regulation of Bax is essential to mediate the apoptotic release of cytochrome c regardless of Bid and Bim activation.
-------------------------------------

10003977_234 - 0.859697938725 - science
[pi-stacking, hydrogen, monohydrogendiphosphopentamolybdate, ch6n3, times, guanidinium, dot, part, cation, hp2mo5o23center]

Pentaguanidinium monohydrogendiphosphopentamolybdate(VI) 2.5-hydrate, (CH6N3)(5)HP2Mo5O23center dot 2.5H(2)O: hydrogen bonding and pi-stacking in guanidinium cations
Times Cited: 0 Part 7
-------------------------------------

10010299_234 - 0.922213102819 - science
[peptide, precursor, ion, selection, sample, complex, elution, method, experiment]

Apex peptide elution chain selection: A new strategy for selecting precursors in 2D-LC-MALDI-TOF/TOF experiments on complex biological samples
{LC-MALDI} provides an often overlooked opportunity to exploit the separation between {LC-MS} and {MS/MS} stages of a {2D-LC-MS-based} proteomics experiment, that is, by making a smarter selection for precursor fragmentation. Apex Peptide Elution Chain Selection {(APECS)} is a simple and powerful method for intensity-based peptide selection in a complex sample separated by {2D-LC}, using a {MALDI-TOF/TOF} instrument. It removes the peptide redundancy present in the adjacent first-dimension (typically strong cation exchange, {SCX)} fractions by constructing peptide elution profiles that link the precursor ions of the same peptide across {SCX} fractions. Subsequently, the precursor ion most likely to fragment successfully in a given profile is selected for fragmentation analysis, selecting on precursor intensity and absence of adjacent ions that may cofragment. To make the method independent of experiment-specific tolerance criteria, we introduce the concept of the branching factor, which measures the likelihood of false clustering of precursor ions based on past experiments. By validation with a complex proteome sample of Arabidopsis thaliana, {APECS} identified an equivalent number of peptides as a conventional data-dependent acquisition method but with a 35\% smaller work load. Consequently, reduced sample depletion allowed further selection of lower signal-to-noise ratio precursor ions, leading to a larger number of identified unique peptides. ?? 2010 American Chemical Society.
-------------------------------------

10011823_234 - 0.831576739146 - medicine
[patient, lenalidomide, cell, response, mcl, maintenance, ci, month, study, median]

Single-agent lenalidomide in relapsed/refractory mantle cell lymphoma: results from a UK phase II study suggest activity and possible gender differences.
We present data from a phase II study investigating a novel treatment strategy for relapsed/refractory mantle cell lymphoma (MCL). Twenty-six patients received lenalidomide 25 mg/d (days 1-21 of a 28-d cycle) for up to 6 cycles followed by low-dose maintenance lenalidomide (15 mg) in responding patients. Eight patients achieved complete or partial response to give an overall response rate of 31% with median response duration of 22·2 months 95% confidence interval (CI) 0·0-53·6 and median progression-free survival (PFS) of 3·9 months (95% CI 0·0-11·1). An additional six patients (23%) achieved stable disease. Eleven patients received maintenance with median PFS of 14·6 months (95% CI 7·3-21·9). Correlative studies showed that peripheral T and Natural Killer (NK) cells increased in responding patients by 40-60% over the first 6 cycles with an initial dip in NK cells suggestive of tumour infiltration. Peripheral regulatory T cells were increased in MCL patients (P = 0·001) and expanded further following lenalidomide. Sequential plasma analysis showed increased IL12 p40 and IL7 alongside decreased MMP9, IL10, and adiponectin. Finally, a significant correlation (P = 0·02) between gender and response suggested that female MCL patients were more sensitive to lenalidomide than males. In summary, we confirm the activity, safety and immunomodulatory properties of lenalidomide in MCL and highlight its potential as a low-dose maintenance agent.
-------------------------------------

10009756_234 - 0.888329671544 - medicine
[infection, fungal, patient, diagnosis]

Diagnosis and prevention of fungal infection in the immunocompromized patient.
Profound and prolonged neutropenia following chemotherapy is a major risk factor for systemic fungal infections. Mortality associated with disseminated fungal infection is high and treatment with conventional amphotericin B is complicated by renal toxicity. Candida and Aspergillus are among the major pathogens in this patient population. Many patients remaining neutropenic over a prolonged period of time will receive empirical antifungal therapy. The clinical and laboratory diagnosis of these infections are neither sensitive nor specific and are generally limited in the early detection of invasive fungal infection. However, several new approaches to diagnosis are being developed which should be translated into routine practice. These include antigen detection and PCR. It is still unclear how effective the various measures that are currently being used are in preventing serious fungal infection. Refinements in the prophylactic use of fluconazole, itraconazole and aerosolized amphoteric in B, and the introduction of new formulations of existing antifungals may reduce the incidence of systemic fungal infections in some patient groups. Patients with presumed fungal infection require more intense and accurate monitoring for signs of disseminated infection. Early diagnosis may guide appropriate treatment and prevent mortality.
-------------------------------------

10002094_234 - 0.859056149081 - technology_and_computing
[sensor, query, networks]

SNEE: A Query Processor for Wireless Sensor Networks
Special issue on Query Processing in Sensor Networks
-------------------------------------

10017143_234 - 0.785054070385 - technology_and_computing
[itemset, cardinality, algorithm, dataset, closed, colossal, large]

DisClose: Discovering Colossal Closed Itemsets from High Dimensional Datasets via a Compact Row-Tree
Data mining is an essential part of knowledge discovery, and performs the extraction of useful information from a collection of data, so as to assist human beings in making necessary decisions. This thesis describes research in the field of itemset mining, which performs the extraction of a set of items that occur together in a dataset, based on a user specified threshold. Recent focus of itemset mining has been on the discovery of closed itemsets from high-dimensional datasets, characterised by relatively few rows and a relatively larger number of columns. A closed itemset is the maximal set of items common to a set of rows. By exponentially increasing running time as the average row length increases, mining closed itemsets from such datasets renders most column enumeration-based algorithm impractical. Existing row enumeration-based algorithms also show that they struggle to reach large cardinality closed itemsets. This is due to the implementation of the support constraint, which is based on the frequency of occurrence of the itemset. Frequent closed itemsets are usually smaller in size and larger in numbers, hence taking much of the memory space. Unfortunately, large cardinality closed itemsets are likely to be more informative than small cardinality closed itemsets in this type of dataset. 	The research investigates the area of large cardinality closed itemset discovery by examining and analysing the literature and identifying both strengths and weaknesses of existing approaches. Based on this synthesis, a new algorithm, termed DisClose, has been designed and developed to discover large cardinality (colossal) closed itemsets from high-dimensional datasets. The algorithm strategy begins by enumerating large cardinality itemsets and from these, builds smaller itemsets. This is done by applying a bottom-up search of the row-enumeration tree. A minimum cardinality threshold has been proposed to identify colossal closed itemsets and to further reduce the search space. A novel closedness-checking method has been proposed which uses a unique generator to immediately discover closed itemsets without the need to check if each new closed itemset has previously been found. These approaches have been combined using a Compact Row-Tree (CR-Tree) data structure designed to assist in the efficient discovery of the colossal closed itemsets. For evaluation purposes four state-of-the-art algorithms have been selected for comparison. Experimental results show that algorithm DisClose is scalable and can efficiently extract colossal closed itemsets in the considered dataset, even for low support thresholds that existing algorithms cannot find.
-------------------------------------

100080_102 - 0.928582748494 - education
[strategy, student, learning, text, learner, design, illustration, research, process, sense]

Learning strategies in interpreting text: From comprehension to illustration
<p>Learning strategies can be described as behaviours and thoughts a learner engages in during learning that are aimed at gaining knowledge. Learners are, to use Mayer’s (1996) constructivist definition, ‘sense makers’. We can therefore position this to mean that, if learners are sense makers, then learning strategies are essentially cognitive processes used when learners are striving to make sense out of newly presented material. This paper intends to demonstrate that such thoughts and behaviours can be made explicit and that students can co-ordinate the basic cognitive processes of selecting, organising and integrating. I will discuss two learning strategies which were developed during three cycles of an action research enquiry with a group of illustration students. While each cycle had its own particular structure and aims, the main task, that of illustrating a passage of expository text into an illustration was a constant factor. The first learning strategy involved assisting students develop ‘macropropositions’—personal understandings of the gist or essence of a text (Louwerse and Graesser, 2006; Armbruster, Anderson and Ostertag,  1987; Van Dijk & Kintsch, 1983). The second learning strategy used a form of induction categorised as analogical reasoning (Holyoak, 2005; Sloman and Lagnado, 2005). Both strategies were combined to illustrate the expository text extract. The data suggests that design students benefit from a structured approach to learning, where thinking processes and approaches can be identified and accessible for other learning situations.  The research methodology is based on semi-structured interviews, questionnaires, developmental design (including student notes) and final design output. All student names used are pseudonyms. The text extract from ‘Through the Magic Door’ an essay Sir Arthur Conan Doyle, (1907) has been included as it provides context to analysis outcomes, student comments and design outputs.
</p>
<p>
<strong>Keywords:</strong> <br />
Action Research; Illustration; Macrostructures; Analogical Reasoning; Learning Strategies</p>
-------------------------------------

10010657_234 - 0.931756303965 - science
[microbial, solid-phase, mineral-radionuclide, radionuclide, cited, times, interaction, capture, effect]

Microbial effects on mineral-radionuclide interactions and radionuclide solid-phase capture processes
Times Cited: 1
-------------------------------------

10009957_234 - 0.773199466811 - science
[serum, elisa, antigen, negative, fumigatus]

Antibody to Aspergillus fumigatus antigens in normal sera: influence on positive-negative discrimination in ELISA.
The response of precipitin-negative sera from non-selected asthmatic patients against a range of somatic and culture filtrate antigens of Aspergillus fumigatus in ELISA for anti-A. fumigatus IgG is described. Antibody to the various antigens was widely distributed but the precise distribution was dependent upon antigen type. To determine how the selection of negative reference sera from precipitin-negative sera can influence the discrimination between precipitin-positive and -negative sera in ELISA, panels of 10 sera were chosen from the extremes of the frequency distribution and by random selection. The closest agreement between precipitin testing and ELISA was seen when randomly-selected negative reference sera were incorporated in the assay, although the degree of correlation was dependent upon the detector antigen. These findings demonstrate the requirement for careful selection of sera included as negative reference sera in ELISA for anti-A. fumigatus IgG.
-------------------------------------

10003576_234 - 0.871224604959 - science
[gene, glnb, glutamine, protein, sequence, synthetase, identity, enzyme, acid]

Streptomyces hygroscopicus has two glutamine synthetase genes
Streptomyces hygroscopicus, which produces the glutamine synthetase inhibitor phosphinothricin, possesses at least two genes {(glnA} and {glnB)} encoding distinct glutamine synthetase isoforms {(GSI} and {GSII).} The {glnB} gene was cloned from S. hygroscopicus {DNA} by complementation in an Escherichia coli glutamine auxotrophic mutant {(glnA).} {glnB} was subcloned in Streptomyces plasmids by insertion into {pIJ486} {(pMSG3)} and {pIJ702} {(pMSG5).} Both constructions conferred resistance to the tripeptide form of phosphinothricin (bialaphos) and were able to complement a glutamine auxotrophic marker in S. coelicolor. Sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoretic analysis of S. {lividans(pMSG5)} revealed a highly overexpressed 40-kilodalton protein. When {GS} was purified from this strain, it was indistinguishable in apparent molecular mass from the 40-kilodalton protein. The nucleic acid sequence of the cloned region contained an open reading frame which encoded a protein whose size, amino acid composition, and N-terminal sequence corresponded to those of the purified {GS.} {glnB} had a high {G+C} content and codon usage typical of streptomycete genes. A comparison of its predicted amino acid sequence with the protein data bases revealed that it encoded a {GSII-type} enzyme which had previously been found only in various eucaryotes (47 to 50\% identity) and nodulating bacteria such as Bradyrhizobium spp. (42\% identity). {glnB} had only 13 to 18\% identity with eubacterial {GSI} enzymes. Southern blot hydridization experiments showed that sequences similar to {glnB} were present in all of the five other Streptomyces species tested, as well as Frankia species. These results do not support the previous suggestion that {GSII-type} enzymes found in members of the family Rhizobiocaea represent a unique example of interkingdom gene transfer associated with symbiosis in the nodule. Instead they imply that the presence of more than one gene encoding {GS} may be more common among soil microorganisms than previously appreciated.
-------------------------------------

10005692_234 - 0.818225780942 - medicine
[disease, prevalence, diverticular, patient]

Prevalence of diverticular disease of the colon in patients with ischaemic heart disease.
In view of the similar patterns of incidence of diverticular disease of the colon (DD) and ischaemic heart disease (IHD) in different communities, the prevalence of diverticular disease was investigated in male patients after recovery from acute myocardial infarction. A significantly higher prevalence of DD was found among infarct patients (57%) than among male control subjects (25%) matched for age and social class.
-------------------------------------

10011020_234 - 0.796940259761 - science
[study, green, synchrotron, magnetite, rust, precursor]

Green rust as a precursor for magnetite: An in situ synchrotron based study
cited By (since 1996) 5
-------------------------------------

10003661_234 - 0.796142957234 - medicine
[rehabilitation, stroke]

Rehabilitation following stroke.
Rehabilitation following stroke begins as soon as the patient is medically stable and continues after discharge from hospital. This article describes the processes involved.
-------------------------------------

10006965_234 - 0.918684167623 - science
[gradient, transmural, protein, adult, mrna, endocardium, case, apd, change]

Postnatal development of transmural gradients in expression of ion channels and Ca²⁺-handling proteins in the ventricle.
Transmural gradients in myocyte action potential duration (APD) and Ca(2+)-handling proteins are argued to be important for both the normal functioning of the ventricle and arrhythmogenesis. In rabbit, the transmural gradient in APD (left ventricular wedge preparation) is minimal in the neonate. During postnatal development, APD increases both in the epicardium and the endocardium, but the prolongation is more substantial in the endocardium leading to a significant transmural gradient. We have investigated changes in the expression of ion channels and also Ca(2+)-handling proteins in the subepicardial and subendocardial layers of the left ventricular free wall in neonatal (2-7 days of age) and adult male (~6 months of age) New Zealand White rabbits using quantitative PCR and also, when possible, in situ hybridisation and immunohistochemistry. In the adult, there were significant and substantial transmural gradients in Ca(v)1.2, KChIP2, ERG, K(v)LQT1, K(ir)2.1, NCX1, SERCA2a and RyR2 at the mRNA and, in some cases, protein level-in every case the mRNA or protein was more abundant in the epicardium than the endocardium. Of the eight transmural gradients seen in the adult, only three were observed in the neonate and, in two of these cases, the gradients were smaller than those in the adult. However, in the neonate there were also transmural gradients not observed in the adult: in HCN4, Na(v)1.5, minK, K(ir)3.1 and Cx40 mRNAs - in every case the mRNA was more abundant in the endocardium than the epicardium. If the postnatal changes in ion channel mRNAs are used to predict changes in ionic conductances, mathematical modelling predicts the changes in APD observed experimentally. It is concluded that many of the well known transmural gradients in the ventricle develop postnatally.
-------------------------------------

10009963_234 - 0.804466850353 - science
[serum, antigen, albican, time, degree, negative, elisa, precipitin, antibody, igg]

Further evaluation of factors affecting a rapid ELISA procedure for detection of IgG antibodies to Candida albicans.
A rapid enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) was developed to detect IgG antibodies against a cytoplasmic antigen of Candida albicans. The optimum conditions and time required for each step were investigated. Pre-equilibration at 37 degrees C and constant agitation of immunoreactants resulted in a total test time of 1 h for examination of single serum dilutions. Initial binding of the antigen at 37 degrees C to the solid phase occurred within 4-6 min and was dependent on concentration. A serum dilution of 100-fold resulted in adequate discrimination between precipitin test-positive and -negative sera. Interaction of antibody and the bound antigen was maximal after 6 min incubation at 37 degrees C and was dependent upon the precipitin titre of the serum. Ten minutes was selected as the optimal incubation time for each of the stages, by which time maximal binding had occurred, irrespective of antibody affinity for antigen. The ELISA was completed by incubation at 37 degrees C for 10 min with alkaline phosphatase-conjugated anti-human IgG. Discrimination between positive and negative test sera was achieved by incorporating in each test run precipitin test-positive and -negative reference sera from groups of persons with or without C. albicans colonization or infection. Closest agreement between sera positive for C. albicans precipitins by counter-immunoelectrophoresis and the rapid ELISA was seen when reference negative sera were selected from non-colonized individuals.
-------------------------------------

10003726_234 - 0.864086871451 - technology_and_computing
[hardware, model, neural, performance, mlp, network]

Event-driven MLP implementation on neuromimetic hardware
While new neural hardware is increasingly emphasizing spiking neural models, there will still be a need to model “classical” neural networks like the multilayer perceptron (MLP) for the foreseeable future. Given that the trend in new chips is towards a “neuromimetic” design that specialises the hardware for neural networks but does not hardwire the model, it is worth examining whether it is possible to implement the MLP on such hardware and realise performance gains over conventional simulation on general-purpose computers. Using the SpiNNaker chip as a demonstration platform, we show that it is possible to find efficient mappings to improve both the performance and the scalability of the MLP network, allowing for much larger models than possible in software. These mappings, however require a careful consideration of how to transform the “timeless” MLP model into an event-driven implementation. Examination of the hardware performance also reveals the importance of distributing processing and traffic load so that local congestion does not end up crippling the simulation. These considerations being solved, not only does the hardware demonstrate the potential for significant performance improvement, it also illustrates important general techniques and methods for translating nonspiking models onto the emerging generation of spiking neural hardware. The results suggest both the form that models might take and the architectures that future neural hardware could adopt for optimum generality and performance.
-------------------------------------

10009769_234 - 0.844078283414 - science
[neuroblastoma, aspergillus, flavus, endocarditis, cardiac]

Aspergillus flavus endocarditis in a child with neuroblastoma.
We report a case of Aspergillus flavus endocarditis in a 6-year-old boy with stage IV neuroblastoma with no pre-existing cardiac disease. The infection was successfully treated with high-dose liposomal amphotericin (AmBisome) once daily. Recurrence was prevented with itraconazole oral solution once daily as maintenance therapy. Adjunctive surgery was not required. The patient's cardiac function was uncompromised, but subsequent death from progressive neuroblastoma prevented long-term follow-up.
-------------------------------------

10012730_234 - 0.739150047363 - food_and_drink
[intake, fat, feedback, personalised, group]

Efficacy of a minimal intervention to reduce fat intake.
Effective dietary interventions must be developed to reduce fat intake in whole populations, rather than clinical subgroups. This study tested the effects of personalised feedback on fat intake in a general population. Hospital workers (n = 801) were randomised to receive personalised feedback or no personalised feedback. Personalised feedback consisted of one sentence expressing current fat intake as a percentage of total calorific intake. Changes in fat intake from baseline to five months post-intervention were evaluated. The personalised intervention produced significant decreases in total and saturated fat intake, compared with the control group. Total-fat decreased by 8.6% (versus 0.2% in the control group); saturated fat decreased by 9.3% (versus 1.7% in the control group). Fat intake as a proportion of total calorific intake did not decrease significantly in either condition. Findings also revealed differential effects of feedback on high- versus low-fat consumer groups. Personalised feedback significantly reduced fat intake in high-fat consumers, and prevented low-fat consumers from increasing their fat intake. Personalised fat feedback therefore represents an efficacious and low-intensity approach to the reduction of fat intake in the general population.
-------------------------------------

10004929_234 - 0.920243496959 - medicine
[nurse, patient, management, care, symptom, community]

Symptom Management in Primary Care: An Ethnographic Study of the Community Nursing Role
Aims: Pain and other physical symptoms remain prevalent inthe palliative care population, and outcomes are not alwaysoptimal. Assessment, monitoring, medicines management,evaluation and collaboration are key nursing roles that mayhave a positive impact. Whether and how nurses enact theseroles is not well understood. This study aimed to investigatethe role of the community nurse in palliative care provision,with a particular focus on observational exploration of theirrole and practice in providing patient care.Methods: A longitudinal qualitative ethnographic design,comprising observation of community nurse/palliative carepatient/carer encounters over time, and post observationinterviews with patients, carers and nurses. Patients weresampled from 12 community team caseloads across threeprimary care organisations. Observations and interviewswere audio-recorded and transcribed. Iterative data analysiscomprised familiarisation, coding and categorisation usingtechniques of constant comparison to generate typologiesof concepts. The study received all necessary ethics andgovernance approvals.Results: 17 nurse/patient encounters were observed (n=11 patients, 8 nurses) with 23 post observation interviews(11 nurse, 12 patient/carer). The discussion of physicalsymptoms, especially pain, formed the core of eachobserved encounter. Nurses primarily focused on medicinesmanagement (dose, frequency, suitability), other approachesto symptom management were infrequent. Nurses wereskilled at using informal conversational assessment styles,but the non-use of formal assessment tools could narrowthe range of issues assessed. Nurses discussed the complexinterplay between physical, psychological and socialsymptoms, but this was not always reflected in care.Conclusion: Symptom management is integral tocommunity nurses work, but there is scope to improve theway this is conducted which could have a positive impacton patient outcomes.
-------------------------------------

10017410_234 - 0.740762597859 - science
[switching, surface, metric, collision, form, point, normal, euclidean, function, condition]

The border collision normal form with stochastic switching surface
The deterministic border collision normal form describes the bifurcations of a discrete time dynamical system as a fixed point moves across the switching surface with changing parameter. If the position of the switching surface varies randomly, but within some bounded region, we give conditions which imply that the attractor close to the bifurcation point is the attractor of an Iterated Function System. The proof uses an equivalent metric to the Euclidean metric because the functions involved are never contractions in the Euclidean metric. If the conditions do not hold then a range of possibilities may be realized, including local instability, and some examples are investigated numerically.
-------------------------------------

10005335_234 - 0.870625283725 - medicine
[patient, hour, care, satisfaction, questionnaire, item, interview, scale, measure]

Reliability and validity of a new measure of patient satisfaction with out of hours primary medical care in the United Kingdom: development of a patient questionnaire.
OBJECTIVE: To develop a reliable, valid measure of patient satisfaction with out of hours care suitable for large scale service evaluation. DESIGN: Focus group meetings and semistructured interviews with patients to identify issues of importance to patients and possible questionnaire items; interviews and two pilot studies to test and identify new questionnaire items; modification or removal of items to eliminate ambiguity and reduce non-response and skewed responses; questionnaire survey of out of hours care. SETTING: Greater Manchester and Leicester. SUBJECTS: 11 general practice patients participated in the focus groups and 28 in the semistructured interviews; 41 in the preliminary interviews; 41 and 378 in the postal pilots; and 1466 in the survey of out of hours care. RESULTS: A 32 item questionnaire was developed. Component analysis indicated seven scales (satisfaction with communication and management, doctor's attitude, continuity of care, delay until visit, access to out of hours care, initial contact person, telephone advice) related to overall satisfaction and containing issues identified as important to patients. Levels of reliability were satisfactory, Cronbach's alpha correlation coefficient exceeding 0.60 for all scales. CONCLUSION: A reliable, valid measure of patient satisfaction has been developed, suitable for large scale evaluation of out of hours care.
-------------------------------------

10017119_234 - 0.909177844236 - science
[tissue, cell, collagen, fibril, tendon, arhgap28, strong, scientist]

Identification of Arhgap28, a New Regulator of Stress Fibre Formation in Cells Assembling a Fibrous Extracellular Matrix
Discovery of Arhgap28, a Molecule Involved in Controlling Cell Forces Important in Making a Strong TendonMovements of the body such as running or gripping a door handle require strong tissue types such as muscle, bone, tendon, ligament and cartilage. These tissues make up the musculoskeletal system. Their ability to transmit and withstand mechanical loading is because of a rope-like protein called collagen, which surrounds the cells. Collagen is important as it allows tissues of the body to endure the constant forces of being pulled, pushed and squashed. In bone tissue, these fibrils are woven together to allow calcium to bind, which creates strong bone that can bear the weight of the body. The collagen ropes or ‘fibrils’ in tendon are bundled together like a rope so that tendons can be stretched repetitively without breaking. How the collagen fibrils are organised is linked to the function of the tissue. A disadvantage of having such a unique and strong tissue structure is that once damaged, the collagen fibrils do not fully repair, often resulting in poor healing and long-term recovery. It is estimated that the annual cost of tendon injury in the UK is £25 billion. Scientists led by Professor Karl Kadler at the University of Manchester want to understand how organisation of collagen fibrils is established during the formation of musculoskeletal tissues, so that new medical treatments to improve tissue healing may be developed. As a starting point, the scientists began studying tendon tissue. Since 2004, they have discovered that the cells that live in tendon are responsible for organising the collagen fibrils into non-crisscrossing, straight strands. They found that the cell scaffolding plays important roles in the organisation of collagen fibrils and in generating pulling forces used to make tendons strong. This PhD project investigated the idea that the organisation of the scaffolding inside the cell is responsible for determining the arrangement of the collagen fibrils outside the cell. Scientists found a gene called Arhgap28 that is more prevalent in cells when they make tendon tissues. Experiments showed that Arhgap28 could prevent the cell scaffolding from generating pulling forces. Scientists now think that Arhgap28 controls how the cell is able to touch and pull on fibrils so that they can be arranged correctly and produce a tissue that is not too stiff and not too loose. Further understanding of Arhgap28 would pave the way for improved therapeutics for musculoskeletal injuries in the future.
-------------------------------------

10005610_234 - 0.944057058586 - medicine
[patient, bowel, syndrome, change, irritable, hypnotherapy, sensitivity, rectal]

Changes in rectal sensitivity after hypnotherapy in patients with irritable bowel syndrome.
Fifteen patients with the irritable bowel syndrome were studied to assess the effect of hypnotherapy on anorectal physiology. In comparison with a control group of 15 patients who received no hypnotherapy significant changes in rectal sensitivity were found in patients with diarrhoea-predominant irritable bowel syndrome both after a course of hypnotherapy and during a session of hypnosis (p less than 0.05). Although patient numbers were small, a trend towards normalisation of rectal sensitivity was also observed in patients with constipation-predominant irritable bowel syndrome. No changes in rectal compliance or distension-induced motor activity occurred in either subgroup nor were any changes in somatic pain thresholds observed. The results suggest that symptomatic improvement in irritable bowel syndrome after hypnotherapy may in part be due to changes in visceral sensitivity.
-------------------------------------

10007541_234 - 0.735779501235 - science
[criterion, nonlinearity, lur]

Stability Criteria for Discrete-time Lur'e Systems with Monotonic, sector- and slope-restricted nonlinearities.
This note presents new LMI-based stability criteria for the discrete-time multivariable Lur’e system with nonlinearities that are monotonic, sector- and slope-restricted. Corresponding Lur’e-Lyapunov functions are constructed for such a system. The new criteria are expressed in a reasonably general form that can be applied to both non-diagonal and diagonal nonlinearities. We explicitly compare the new approach to the existing LMI-based Popov-like criteria in the literature, and express the results in terms of an Integral Quadratic Constraint (IQC). The applications of the new criteria to some control problems and strategies are briefly discussed. Numerical examples are included to show their performance, and they are shown to be less conservative than the previous results.
-------------------------------------

10018346_234 - 0.717417539404 - medicine
[infection, mouse, rsv, lung, virus, vaccination]

Influenza virus lung infection protects from respiratory syncytial virus-induced immunopathology.
The effect of infection history is ignored in most animal models of infectious disease. The attachment protein of respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) induces T helper cell type 2-driven pulmonary eosinophilia in mice similar to that seen in the failed infant vaccinations in the 1960s. We show that previous influenza virus infection of mice: (a) protects against weight loss, illness, and lung eosinophilia; (b) attenuates recruitment of inflammatory cells; and (c) reduces cytokine secretion caused by RSV attachment protein without affecting RSV clearance. This protective effect can be transferred via influenza-immune splenocytes to naive mice and is long lived. Previous immunity to lung infection clearly plays an important and underestimated role in subsequent vaccination and infection. The data have important implications for the timing of vaccinations in certain patient groups, and may contribute to variability in disease susceptibility observed in humans.
-------------------------------------

10011503_234 - 0.805661785457 - medicine
[symptom, cancer, lung, scopus, intervention, informal, article, management, press, view]

Considerations in Developing and Delivering a Nonpharmacological Intervention for Symptom Management in Lung Cancer: The Views of Patients and Informal Caregivers
Export Date: 28 August 2012 Source: Scopus Article in Press
-------------------------------------

10005568_234 - 0.897195321886 - science
[different, necrobiosis, nodular, crohn, disease]

'Nodular necrobiosis': a new cutaneous manifestation of Crohn's disease?
A skin lesion previously unassociated with Crohn's disease is described. Although superficially resembling erythema nodosum it runs a different clinical course and has different histological appearances, the central feature being necrobiotic collagen. The term ;nodular necrobiosis' is suggested.
-------------------------------------

10003886_234 - 0.874151917598 - medicine
[ratio, exacerbation, pulmonary, severe, copd, cohort]

Pulmonary arterial enlargement and acute exacerbations of COPD.
BACKGROUND: Exacerbations of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) are associated with accelerated loss of lung function and death. Identification of patients at risk for these events, particularly those requiring hospitalization, is of major importance. Severe pulmonary hypertension is an important complication of advanced COPD and predicts acute exacerbations, though pulmonary vascular abnormalities also occur early in the course of the disease. We hypothesized that a computed tomographic (CT) metric of pulmonary vascular disease (pulmonary artery enlargement, as determined by a ratio of the diameter of the pulmonary artery to the diameter of the aorta PA:A ratio of >1) would be associated with severe COPD exacerbations. METHODS: We conducted a multicenter, observational trial that enrolled current and former smokers with COPD. We determined the association between a PA:A ratio of more than 1 and a history at enrollment of severe exacerbations requiring hospitalization and then examined the usefulness of the ratio as a predictor of these events in a longitudinal follow-up of this cohort, as well as in an external validation cohort. We used logistic-regression and zero-inflated negative binomial regression analyses and adjusted for known risk factors for exacerbation. RESULTS: Multivariate logistic-regression analysis showed a significant association between a PA:A ratio of more than 1 and a history of severe exacerbations at the time of enrollment in the trial (odds ratio, 4.78; 95% confidence interval CI, 3.43 to 6.65; P<0.001). A PA:A ratio of more than 1 was also independently associated with an increased risk of future severe exacerbations in both the trial cohort (odds ratio, 3.44; 95% CI, 2.78 to 4.25; P<0.001) and the external validation cohort (odds ratio, 2.80; 95% CI, 2.11 to 3.71; P<0.001). In both cohorts, among all the variables analyzed, a PA:A ratio of more than 1 had the strongest association with severe exacerbations. CONCLUSIONS: Pulmonary artery enlargement (a PA:A ratio of >1), as detected by CT, was associated with severe exacerbations of COPD. (Funded by the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute; ClinicalTrials.gov numbers, NCT00608764 and NCT00292552.).
-------------------------------------

10007782_234 - 0.737615900223 - science
[uptake, tumor, reference, normal, region, ratio, method, methionine, map, pet]

Evaluation of primary brain tumors using 11C-methionine PET with reference to a normal methionine uptake map.
UNLABELLED: (11)C-Methionine PET is a well-established technique for evaluating tumor extent for diagnosis and treatment planning in neurooncology. Image interpretation is typically performed using the ratio of uptake within the tumor to a reference region. The precise location of this reference region is important as local variations in methionine uptake may significantly alter the result, particularly for lesions at the border of gray and white matter. Selection of a reference region can be highly user dependant, and identifying a representative normal region may be complicated by midline or multifocal tumors. We hypothesized that current coregistration methods would enable interpretation of methionine PET images with reference to an averaged normal uptake map, allowing better standardization of scan analysis and increasing the sensitivity to tumor infiltration, particularly of white matter regions. METHODS: A normal methionine uptake map was prepared from the normal hemispheres of 20 scans performed on patients with benign or low-grade lesions. Affine and nonlinear coregistration algorithms were evaluated for spatial normalization of the images to a previously developed PET template. A standardized method for applying the normal uptake map in brain tumors was developed and evaluated in a sample of 18 scans (6 grade II, 6 grade III, and 6 grade IV gliomas). Tumor extent was compared with that derived from a mirrored contralateral reference region method. Correlation coefficients were calculated between the uptake ratios for tumor to normal uptake map versus tumor to mirrored reference region. RESULTS: "RatioMap" images depicting voxel-by-voxel ratios of a patient scan to the normal uptake map revealed increased methionine uptake in white matter regions that could not be identified using the standard method. Uptake ratios within the tumor varied slightly with the normalization methods used but correlated closely with the ratio to a single reference value. Nonlinear coregistration with median ratio intensity normalization gave the strongest correlation (r = 0.97, P < 0.001, n = 17). CONCLUSION: Evaluation of methionine PET data with reference to normal uptake data may improve sensitivity to white matter infiltration. The tumor uptake ratios obtained correlated closely with a standard reference value technique, whereas the described method allowed for better standardization of the image analysis.
-------------------------------------

10010338_234 - 0.876744617613 - science
[antibiotic, metabolite, signalling, biosynthesis, time, mutant, scba, ??, molecule, scb]

Deletion of the signalling molecule synthase ScbA has pleiotropic effects on secondary metabolite biosynthesis, morphological differentiation and primary metabolism in Streptomyces coelicolor A3(2)
Streptomycetes have high biotechnological relevance as producers of diverse metabolites widely used in medical and agricultural applications. The biosynthesis of these metabolites is controlled by signalling molecules, ??-butyrolactones, that act as bacterial hormones. In Streptomyces coelicolor, a group of signalling molecules called SCBs (S. coelicolorbutanolides) regulates production of the pigmented antibiotics coelicolor polyketide (CPK), actinorhodin and undecylprodigiosin. The ??-butyrolactone synthase ScbA is responsible for the biosynthesis of SCBs. Here we show the results of a genome-wide transcriptome analysis of a scbA deletion mutant prior to and during the transition to antibiotic production. We report a strong perturbation in the expression of three pigmented antibiotic clusters in the mutant throughout the growth curve, thus providing a molecular explanation for the antibiotic phenotype observed previously. Our study also revealed, for the first time, that the secondary metabolite cluster responsible for synthesis of the siderophore desferrioxamine is under the control of SCB signalling. Moreover, expression of the genes encoding enzymes for primary metabolism pathways, which supply antibiotic precursors and genes for morphological differentiation, was found shifted earlier in time in the mutant. In conclusion, our time series analysis demonstrates new details of the regulatory effects of the ??-butyrolactone system in Streptomyces. ?? 2010 The Authors. Journal compilation ?? 2010 Society for Applied Microbiology and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
-------------------------------------

10018370_234 - 0.901617606463 - science
[pathway, innate, classical, bacterial, immunity, complement, response, component, pathogen, igm]

The classical pathway is the dominant complement pathway required for innate immunity to Streptococcus pneumoniae infection in mice.
The complement system is an important component of the innate immune response to bacterial pathogens, including Streptococcus pneumoniae. The classical complement pathway is activated by antibody-antigen complexes on the bacterial surface and has been considered predominately to be an effector of the adaptive immune response, whereas the alternative and mannose-binding lectin pathways are activated directly by bacterial cell surface components and are considered effectors of the innate immune response. Recently, a role has been suggested for the classical pathway during innate immunity that is activated by natural IgM or components of the acute-phase response bound to bacterial pathogens. However, the functional importance of the classical pathway for innate immunity to S. pneumoniae and other bacterial pathogens, and its relative contribution compared with the alternative and mannose-binding lectin pathways has not been defined. By using strains of mice with genetic deficiencies of complement components and secretory IgM we have investigated the role of each complement pathway and natural IgM for innate immunity to S. pneumoniae. Our results show that the proportion of a population of S. pneumoniae bound by C3 depends mainly on the classical pathway, whereas the intensity of C3 binding depends on the alternative pathway. Furthermore, the classical pathway, partially targeted by the binding of natural IgM to bacteria, is the dominant pathway for activation of the complement system during innate immunity to S. pneumoniae, loss of which results in rapidly progressing septicemia and impaired macrophage activation. These data demonstrate the vital role of the classical pathway for innate immunity to a bacterial pathogen.
-------------------------------------

10002031_234 - 0.960896364657 - medicine
[patient, contraindication, drotrecogin, alfa, treatment, apache, score, organ, admission, eligible]

Estimate of the number of patients eligible for treatment with drotrecogin alfa (activated) based on differing international indications: post-hoc analysis of an inception cohort study in Australia and New Zealand.
We aimed to estimate the potential number of patients eligible for treatment with drotrecogin alfa (activated) when applying different international criteria. The study was a post-hoc analysis of inception cohort study of 691 patients with severe sepsis during 5878 consecutive intensive care unit admission episodes in 23 closed multi-disciplinary ICUs of 21 hospitals (16 tertiary and 5 university-affiliated) in Australia and New Zealand. Outcomes assessed were presence of contraindications to treatment with drotrecogin alfa (activated), an admission APACHE II score of 25 or greater and dysfunction of two or more organs. During 5878 consecutive intensive care admission episodes, 691 patients had severe sepsis, 553 (80.0%, 95% CI 77.0-83.0%) had no relative or absolute contraindication, 64 (9.3%, 7.1-11.4%) had a relative contraindication and 74 (10.7%, 8.4-13.0%) had an absolute contraindication. Two hundred and six patients (3.5%, 3.0-4.0%) had an APACHE II score of 25 or greater, 452 (7.7%, 7.0-8.4%) had dysfunction of two or more organs, 469 (8.0%, 7.3-8.7%) had either dysfunction of two or more organs or an APACHE II score of 25 or greater Relatively few patients had an absolute contraindication to treatment with drotrecogin alfa (activated). Selection based on the APACHE II score results in fewer eligible patients than selection based on multiple organ dysfunction. Depending on the selection criteria used, for every hundred admissions to intensive care, between 3.5 and 8.0 of patients may be eligible for treatment with drotrecogin alfa (activated).
-------------------------------------

10007677_234 - 0.813101304714 - medicine
[hypoglycaemia, diabetes, belief, patient, health, change, status, glucose, experience, type]

Experience of hypoglycaemia is associated with changes in beliefs about diabetes in patients with type 2 diabetes.
AIM: Hypoglycaemia may have a detrimental impact on quality of life for patients with Type 2 diabetes. There are few clinical studies exploring the impact of experiencing hypoglycaemia on beliefs about diabetes and health status. The aim of this study was to explore associations between experience of hypoglycaemia and changes in diabetes beliefs and self-reported health status in patients with non-insulin-treated Type 2 diabetes using a blood glucose meter. METHODS: One-year prospective cohort analysis of 226 patients recruited to a randomized trial evaluating the impact of self-monitoring of blood glucose. Self-reported hypoglycaemia over 1 year was categorized into three groups: (1) no experience of hypoglycaemia; (2) blood glucose measurements < 4 mmol/l with no associated symptoms of hypoglycaemia (grade 1); and (3) symptomatic hypoglycaemia (grade 2 and 3). Measures of beliefs about diabetes (Revised Illness Perception Questionnaire) and health status (EuroQol-5D) were assessed at baseline and 1 year. Differences in mean changes over 1 year were explored with analyses of covariance. RESULTS: There was a significant increase in mean score in beliefs about personal control (1.14; 95%CI 0.14-2.14) among those experiencing grade 1 hypoglycaemia compared with those not experiencing hypoglycaemia. There were no significant differences in changes in health status between groups, with small overall changes that were inconsistent between groups. CONCLUSIONS: This study does not provide support for a long-term adverse impact on beliefs about diabetes or health status from the experience of mild symptomatic hypoglycaemia, in well-controlled, non-insulin-treated patients with Type 2 diabetes using self-monitoring of blood glucose.
-------------------------------------

10009439_234 - 0.925125773622 - science
[calcification, genetic, intracranial, icc, classification, unknown, diagnostic, methodology, phenotype]

Recognisable phenotypes associated with intracranial calcification
Intracranial calcification (ICC) is often considered to be of low diagnostic specificity. We present a methodology for systematic radiological descriptive phenotyping of ICC. This technique was applied to the imaging of 140 paediatric patients with known as well as unknown genetic abnormalities. A decision tree classification system achieved domain expert agreement of 90% in the phenotypic classification of Aicardi-Goutières syndrome, cerebroretinal microangiopathy with calcification and cysts , other known and unknown genetic disorders. We propose this methodology for diagnostic inclusion/exclusion as well as the identification of new genetic phenotypes derived from neuroimaging.
-------------------------------------

10009731_234 - 0.903515637992 - medicine
[fungal, rhinosinusitis, patient, fumigatus, pcr, aspergillus, diagnosis, gm, negative, positive]

Negative impact of Aspergillus galactomannan and DNA detection in the diagnosis of fungal rhinosinusitis.
A proportion of patients with chronic rhinosinusitis, especially if nasal polyps are present, have a diagnosis of fungal rhinosinusitis. The diagnosis is difficult to establish because the symptoms and clinical and radiological signs are non-specific. Also current diagnostic methods, i.e. histology, fungal staining and culture, are insensitive. The performance of the Aspergillus galactomannan (GM) ELISA and real-time PCR for Aspergillus fumigatus mitochondrial DNA was evaluated for the detection of Aspergillus in sinus mucus samples from 25 patients with chronic rhinosinusitis with nasal polyposis. The results were compared with those from nasal lavage fluid from 19 healthy volunteers. Seven patients (28 %) were diagnosed as having fungal rhinosinusitis according to the presence of filaments in histology or direct microscopy using Calcofluor white. All fungal rhinosinusitis patients were negative in the GM ELISA. GM ELISA was positive in five patients whose samples were negative using conventional methods and A. fumigatus PCR. Two out of seven patients with fungal rhinosinusitis were positive by A. fumigatus PCR: one also had a positive A. fumigatus culture, and one had hyphae consistent with Aspergillus in histology. One additional patient had a weak positive PCR result, but other fungal tests were negative. In control subjects, the GM ELISA was positive in 21 %, whereas direct microscopy, culture and A. fumigatus PCR were negative in all samples. Direct microscopy and culture together with histology remain pivotal in defining fungal rhinosinusitis diagnosis. A. fumigatus PCR may have additional value in allowing the diagnosis to be made sooner, whereas the GM ELISA is not reliable in diagnosing Aspergillus infection of the paranasal sinuses.
-------------------------------------

10005270_234 - 0.927387896679 - science
[tendon, adhesion, flexor, cell, formation, biology]

The cellular biology of flexor tendon adhesion formation: an old problem in a new paradigm.
Intrasynovial flexor tendon injuries of the hand can frequently be complicated by tendon adhesions to the surrounding sheath, limiting finger function. We have developed a new tendon injury model in the mouse to investigate the three-dimensional cellular biology of intrasynovial flexor tendon healing and adhesion formation. We investigated the cell biology using markers for inflammation, proliferation, collagen synthesis, apoptosis, and vascularization/myofibroblasts. Quantitative immunohistochemical image analysis and three-dimensional reconstruction with cell mapping was performed on labeled serial sections. Flexor tendon adhesions were also assessed 21 days after wounding using transmission electron microscopy to examine the cell phenotypes in the wound. When the tendon has been immobilized, the mouse can form tendon adhesions in the flexor tendon sheath. The cell biology of tendon healing follows the classic wound healing response of inflammation, proliferation, synthesis, and apoptosis, but the greater activity occurs in the surrounding tissue. Cells that have multiple "fibripositors" and cells with cytoplasmic protrusions that contain multiple large and small diameter fibrils can be found in the wound during collagen synthesis. In conclusion, adhesion formation occurs due to scarring between two damaged surfaces. The mouse model for flexor tendon injury represents a new platform to study adhesion formation that is genetically tractable.
-------------------------------------

10018274_234 - 0.839822246047 - science
[itp, ditp, xtp, nucleotide]

Characterisation of multiple substrate-specific (d)ITP/XTPase and modelling of deaminated purine nucleotide metabolism
cellular processes, especially those involving DNA and RNA.To be viable, organisms possess a number of (deoxy)nucleotidephosphohydrolases, which hydrolyze these nucleotidesremoving them from the active NTP and dNTP pools.Deamination of purine bases can result in accumulation ofsuch nucleotides as ITP, dITP, XTP and dXTP. E. coli RdgB hasbeen characterised as a deoxyribonucleoside triphosphate pyrophosphohydrolasethat can act on these nucleotides. S. cerevisiaehomologue encoded by YJR069C was purified and its(d)NTPase activity was assayed using fifteen nucleotidesubstrates. ITP, dITP, and XTP were identified as major substratesand kinetic parameters measured. Inhibition by ATP,dATP and GTP were established. On the basis of experimentaland published data, modelling and simulation of ITP, dITP,XTP and dXTP metabolism was performed. (d)ITP/(d)XTPase isa new example of enzyme with multiple substrate-specificitydemonstrating that multispecificity is not a rare phenomenon.
-------------------------------------

10017883_234 - 0.848719443112 - science
[cell, syndecan-1, fascin, matrix, spike, formation, spreading]

A role for syndecan-1 in coupling fascin spike formation by thrombospondin-1.
An important role of cell matrix adhesion receptors is to mediate transmembrane coupling between extracellular matrix attachment, actin reorganization, and cell spreading. Thrombospondin (TSP)-1 is a modulatory component of matrix expressed during development, immune response, or wound repair. Cell adhesion to TSP-1 involves formation of biochemically distinct matrix contacts based on stable fascin spikes. The cell surface adhesion receptors required have not been identified. We report here that antibody clustering of syndecan-1 proteoglycan specifically transduces organization of cortical actin and fascin bundles in several cell types. Transfection of COS-7 cells with syndecan-1 is sufficient to stimulate cell spreading, fascin spike assembly, and extensive protrusive lateral ruffling on TSP-1 or on syndecan-1 antibody. The underlying molecular mechanism depends on glycosaminoglycan (GAG) modification of the syndecan-1 core protein at residues S45 or S47 for cell membrane spreading and on the VC2 region of the cytoplasmic domain for spreading and fascin spike formation. Expression of the VC2 deletion mutant or GAG-negative syndecan-1 showed that syndecan-1 is necessary in spreading and fascin spike formation by C2C12 cells on TSP-1. These results establish a novel role for syndecan-1 protein in coupling a physiological matrix ligand to formation of a specific matrix contact structure.
-------------------------------------

10009367_234 - 0.823229592309 - science
[ph, susceptibility, azole, glabra, agent]

Effect of pH on in vitro susceptibility of Candida glabrata and Candida albicans to 11 antifungal agents and implications for clinical use.
The treatment of vulvovaginal candidiasis (VVC) due to Candida glabrata is challenging, with limited therapeutic options. Unexplained disappointing clinical efficacy has been reported with systemic and topical azole antifungal agents in spite of in vitro susceptibility. Given that the vaginal pH of patients with VVC is unchanged at 4 to 4.5, we studied the effect of pH on the in vitro activity of 11 antifungal agents against 40 C. glabrata isolates and compared activity against 15 fluconazole-sensitive and 10 reduced-fluconazole-susceptibility C. albicans strains. In vitro susceptibility to flucytosine, fluconazole, voriconazole, posaconazole, itraconazole, ketoconazole, clotrimazole, miconazole, ciclopirox olamine, amphotericin B, and caspofungin was determined using the CLSI method for yeast susceptibility testing. Test media were buffered to pHs of 7, 6, 5, and 4. Under conditions of reduced pH, C. glabrata isolates remained susceptible to caspofungin and flucytosine; however, there was a dramatic increase in the MIC(90) for amphotericin B and every azole drug tested. Although susceptible to other azole drugs tested at pH 7, C. albicans strains with reduced fluconazole susceptibility also demonstrated reduced susceptibility to amphotericin B and all azoles at pH 4. In contrast, fluconazole-sensitive C. albicans isolates remained susceptible at low pH to azoles, in keeping with clinical observations. In selecting agents for treatment of recurrent C. glabrata vaginitis, clinicians should recognize the limitations of in vitro susceptibility testing utilizing pH 7.0.
-------------------------------------

10018176_234 - 0.793166919023 - science
[tc, sediment, concentration]

The fate of technetium in reduced estuarine sediments: Combining direct and indirect analyses
Technetium-99 is an important fission product in radioactive wastes. As Tc(VII)O-4(-), Tc is highly mobile in oxic environments but, under reducing conditions, Tc becomes strongly associated with sediments as hydrous Tc(IV)O-2 like phases. In order to further examine the behaviour of Tc over a range of concentrations in estuarine sediments, anoxic incubation experiments were combined with a range of direct (transmission electron microscopy and gamma camera imaging) and indirect (incubation experiments and chemical extractions) experimental techniques. When TcO4- was incubated in sediment microcosms at micro-molar (10(-6) mol L-1) concentrations, >99\% TcO4- was removed from solution over the course of 36 days in systems undergoing active microbial Fe(III)-reduction. By contrast, when spiked into pre-reduced estuarine sediments that were predominantly Fe(III)-reducing (incubated for 60 days) or SO42-reducing (incubated for 270 days), >99\% TcO4- was removed from solution in under 10 min in both Microbially active and heat sterilised systems. Chemical extraction techniques showed that 70 +/- 3\% of Tc bound to sediments was remobilised when sediments were exposed to the first strong oxidant (H2O2) in the extraction scheme. At higher Tc concentrations (similar to 0.05 mol kg(-1) of sediment) scanning transmission electron microscopy, combined with energy dispersive X-ray mapping, was used to examine the associations of Tc in sediments. At these concentrations, Tc was localised and co-associated with nanometre size Fe(II)-rich particles, consistent with the hypothesis that removal of Tc may be controlled by reduction of Tc(VII) to Tc(IV) by biogenic Fe(II) in sediments. In addition, gamma camera imaging with the gamma-emitting (TcO4-)-Tc-99m (half-life 6 h) at pico-molar (10(-12) mol L-1) concentrations, was used to visualise the interaction of Tc in sediments at very low concentrations. Here, over the course of 24 h the scavenging of Tc to SO42-reducing sediments was observed. As the Tc concentrations used in the Tc-99m experiments were below the solubility limits for hydrous Tc(IV)O-2 (ca. 10(-9) mol L-1 at pH 7-9), sorption of Tc(IV) species is likely to be a significant control on Tc behaviour in these sediments even at very low concentrations. Overall, the results of this study show that multiple approaches are essential to understanding Tc speciation in complex heterogeneous sediments over the wide range of concentrations relevant to contaminated natural and engineered environments. (C) 2009 Published by Elsevier Ltd.
-------------------------------------

10013569_234 - 0.916752531507 - science
[peroxisome, yeast, pathway, lysine, datum, biosynthesis, physiological, peroxisome-deficient]

Loss of compartmentalization causes misregulation of lysine biosynthesis in peroxisome-deficient yeast cells
To characterize the metabolic role of peroxisomes in yeast cells under physiological conditions, we performed a comprehensive meta-analysis of published microarray data. Previous studies of yeast peroxisomes have mainly been focused on the function of peroxisomes under extreme conditions, such as growth on oleate or methanol as the sole carbon source, and may therefore not be representative of the normal physiological role of yeast peroxisomes. Surprisingly, our analysis of the microarray data reveals that the only pathway responding to peroxisome deficiency in mid-log phase is lysine biosynthesis, whereas classical peroxisomal pathways such as beta-oxidation are unaffected. We show that the upregulation of lysine biosynthesis genes in peroxisome-deficient yeasts shares many characteristics with the physiological response to lysine starvation. We provide data that suggest that this is the result of a "pathological" stimulation of the Lys14p transcriptional activator by the pathway intermediate aminoadipate semialdehyde. Mistargeting of the peroxisomal lysine pathway to the cytosol increases the active concentration of aminoadipate semialdehyde, which is no longer contained in the peroxisome and can now activate Lys14p at much lower levels than in wild-type yeasts. This is the first well-documented example of pathway misregulation in response to peroxisome deficiency and will be useful in understanding the phenotypic details of human peroxisome-deficient patients (Zellweger syndrome).
-------------------------------------

100077_106 - 0.706181188722 - technology_and_computing
[linac, beam]

Review of beam dynamics and space charge resonances in high intensity linacs
Recent systematic studies of resonant space charge effects and anisotropy have helped to narrow the gap between idealized beam physics models of halos and high-current linac design. We review the beam dynamics basis of nonequipartitioned beams, discuss the consequences of bunch anisotropy, and introduce  3D free energy equivalence  as a new concept to model halo growth in linac bunches. Results are applied to the CERN-SPL, the SNS and the ESS superconducting (sc) linac designs.
-------------------------------------

10005559_234 - 0.826228408138 - medicine
[abpa, saf, asthma, patient]

Allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis and related allergic syndromes.
While allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis (ABPA) is well recognized as a fungal complication of asthma, severe asthma with fungal sensitization (SAFS) is not. In ABPA the total immunoglobulin E (IgE) is usually >1,000 IU/mL, whereas in SAFS it is <1,000 IU/mL, and either skin prick tests or fungus-specific IgE tests are positive. ABPA may present with any severity of asthma, and occasionally with no asthma or cystic fibrosis, the other common underlying disease. SAFS is a problem in patients with poorly controlled asthma and occasionally presents in the intensive care unit (ICU). Production of mucous plugs and coughing paroxysms is more common in ABPA. Certain underlying genetic defects seem to underpin these remarkable phenotypic differences. From a management perspective both ABPA and SAFS respond to both high doses of corticosteroids and oral antifungal agents, with ∼60% response rate in both ABPA and SAFS with itraconazole. In 50% of patients itraconazole boosts inhaled corticosteroid exposure, sometimes leading to cushingoid features. Second-line therapy data are scant, but we have shown that 70 to 80% of patients who tolerate either voriconazole or posaconazole also respond. Other useful therapies include nebulized hypertonic saline to aid expectoration of thick sputum and long-term azithromycin for its anti-inflammatory effect on the airways. Omaluzimab is useful in some patients with SAFS and occasionally in ABPA. Complications of ABPA include bronchiectasis, typically central in distribution, and chronic pulmonary aspergillosis. Most patients with ABPA and SAFS can be stabilized for long periods with inhaled corticosteroids and itraconazole or another antifungal agent. Novel immunotherapies are on the horizon.
-------------------------------------

10004051_234 - 0.73127198157 - science
[protein, study, tim9, system, precursor, import, ims, mitochondrium, mitochondrial, tim]

Investigation into the molecular mechanisms of import of mitochondrial small Tim proteins
Protein import is essential for the biogenesis of mitochondria, as the majority (99%) of mitochondrial proteins is synthesized in the cytosol and thus, have to be imported into mitochondria for their function. The biogenesis of many cysteine-containing proteins of the mitochondrial intermembrane space (IMS), such as members of the small TIM and Cox17 families, is regulated by their thiol-disulphide redox state. Only the Cys-reduced precursors can be imported into mitochondria, whereas oxidised forms cannot. Their import and oxidative folding in the IMS is driven by the IMS disulphide relay system, known as mitochondrial import and assembly (MIA) pathway, whose central components are the oxidoreductase Mia40 and the sulphydryl oxidase Erv1. Currently, little is known about how the MIA precursors are maintained in the cytosol in an import-competent form, and whether they interact with the translocase of the outer membrane (TOM complex) to enter the IMS. In addition, the MIA-mediated protein folding events occurring in the IMS that lead to the generation of fully oxidised substrates are still under investigation.  Using Tim9 and yeast as models, studies presented in this thesis showed that Tim9 binding to the mitochondrial outer membrane does not depend on the receptors of the TOM complex, and occurs without regarding to the redox state of the precursor proteins. In addition, it is shown that the oxidised and reduced precursors share the same binding site on the outer membrane, and that this binding site is not important for the translocation process across the OM (Chapter 3).   Studies in this thesis investigated the role of the cytosolic thioredoxin and glutaredoxin systems in the biogenesis of mitochondria. Firstly, in vivo studies provided the evidence that the cytosolic thioredoxin system but not the glutaredoxin system is required for growth of yeast cells under respiratory conditions. Secondly, in vivo studies provided the first proof that the Trx system is required for the biogenesis of small Tim proteins. In vitro studies confirmed that the Trx1 system facilitates import of small Tim proteins into isolated mitochondria by maintaining the precursors in a reduced and therefore competent form (Chapter 5). Finally, in vitro studies showed that Mia40 is able to promote the full oxidation of Tim9. Efficient release of Tim9 from Mia40 required the presence of all cysteine residues of Tim9, as effective oxidation and concomitant release from Mia40 failed upon mutation of single cysteine residues. Finally, the study showed that reduced glutathione resolved rapidly the Mia40-Tim9 mixed-disulphide complexes, probably accelerating and/or promoting the Tim9 oxidative (Chapter 4).
-------------------------------------

10008905_234 - 0.841824966625 - medicine
[ctc, patient, nsclc, stage]

Evaluation and prognostic significance of circulating tumor cells in patients with non-small-cell lung cancer.
PURPOSE: Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer-related death worldwide. Non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) lacks validated biomarkers to predict treatment response. This study investigated whether circulating tumor cells (CTCs) are detectable in patients with NSCLC and what their ability might be to provide prognostic information and/or early indication of patient response to conventional therapy. PATIENTS AND METHODS: In this single-center prospective study, blood samples for CTC analysis were obtained from 101 patients with previously untreated, stage III or IV NSCLC both before and after administration of one cycle of standard chemotherapy. CTCs were measured using a semiautomated, epithelial cell adhesion molecule-based immunomagnetic technique. RESULTS: The number of CTCs in 7.5 mL of blood was higher in patients with stage IV NSCLC (n = 60; range, 0 to 146) compared with patients with stage IIIB (n = 27; range, 0 to 3) or IIIA disease (n = 14; no CTCs detected). In univariate analysis, progression-free survival was 6.8 v 2.4 months with P < .001, and overall survival (OS) was 8.1 v 4.3 months with P < .001 for patients with fewer than five CTCs compared with five or more CTCs before chemotherapy, respectively. In multivariate analysis, CTC number was the strongest predictor of OS (hazard ratio HR, 7.92; 95% CI, 2.85 to 22.01; P < .001), and the point estimate of the HR was increased with incorporation of a second CTC sample that was taken after one cycle of chemotherapy (HR, 15.65; 95% CI, 3.63 to 67.53; P < .001). CONCLUSION: CTCs are detectable in patients with stage IV NSCLC and are a novel prognostic factor for this disease. Further validation is warranted before routine clinical application.
-------------------------------------

10011083_234 - 0.828015230856 - science
[assay, stem, tissue, cell, mammosphere, activity]

A detailed mammosphere assay protocol for the quantification of breast stem cell activity.
Since the discovery that neural tissue contains a population of stem cells that form neurospheres in vitro, sphere-forming assays have been adapted for use with a number of different tissue types for the quantification of stem cell activity and self-renewal. One tissue type widely used for stem cell investigations is mammary tissue, and the mammosphere assay has been used in both normal tissue and cancer. Although it is a relatively simple assay to learn, it can be difficult to master. There are methodological and analytical aspects to the assay which require careful consideration when interpreting the results. We describe here a detailed mammosphere assay protocol for the assessment of stem cell activity and self-renewal, and discuss how data generated by the assay can be analysed and interpreted.
-------------------------------------

10004036_234 - 0.924477613464 - science
[peptide, proteomic, cleavage, proteolytic, surrogate, tool, protein, quantitative]

Prediction of missed proteolytic cleavages for the selection of surrogate peptides for quantitative proteomics.
Abstract Quantitative proteomics experiments are usually performed using proteolytic peptides as surrogates for their parent proteins, inferring protein amounts from peptide-level quantitation. This process is frequently dependent on complete digestion of the parent protein to its limit peptides so that their signal is truly representative. Unfortunately, proteolysis is often incomplete, and missed cleavage peptides are frequently produced that are unlikely to be optimal surrogates for quantitation, particularly for label-mediated approaches seeking to derive absolute values. We have generated a predictive computational tool that is able to predict which candidate proteolytic peptide bonds are likely to be missed by the standard enzyme trypsin. Our cross-validated prediction tool uses support vector machines and achieves high accuracy in excess of 0.94 precision (PPV), with attendant high sensitivity of 0.79, across multiple proteomes. We believe this is a useful tool for selecting candidate quantotypic peptides, seeking to minimize likely loss owing to missed cleavage, which will be a boon for quantitative proteomic pipelines as well as other areas of proteomics. Our results are discussed in the context of recent results examining the kinetics of missed cleavages in proteomic digestion protocols, and show agreement with observed experimental trends. The software has been made available at http://king.smith.man.ac.uk/mcpred .
-------------------------------------

10010032_234 - 0.826311372038 - society
[social, licence, community, impact]

Social licences to operate: For better not for worse; for richer not for poorer? The impacts of unplanned mining closure for ‘fence-line’ residential communities
Establishing 'social licences to operate‘ with communities has become a significant corporate social responsibility agenda. The complex dynamics of these relationships can compound the impacts for communities when these contracts are not upheld. This article documents reflections from a Rapid Rural Appraisal conducted in the Shire of Ravensthorpe in remote Western Australia after the Ravensthorpe Nickel Operation was 'mothballed‘ nine months into a projected twenty five year life span. It captures how communication about the project and its timeframes created a sense of consistency, predictability, certainty and trust - enabling the social licence. The raising of hope, and the emergence of mistrust underpin the social, environmental and financial impacts of this event for the local community. Embedded in the theoretical dimensions of social licences this case study highlights the problematic of social licences that engage with non-contractual stakeholders as partners in 'booms‘ but have no legal responsibility towards them in times of 'bust‘.
-------------------------------------

10009972_234 - 0.85255440448 - science
[blastospore, extracellular]

Differentiation of extracellular from ingested Candida albicans blastospores in phagocytosis tests by staining with fluorescein-labelled concanavalin A.
In phagocytosis tests with human polymorphonuclear (PMN) cells, extracellular blastospores of Candida albicans could be distinguished microscopically from ingested blastospores mor easily than with methods used previously by staining phagocyte monolayers with fluorescent-labelled concanavalin A. This stain reacted with the cell wall mannan of extracellular blastospores but seemed unable to reach that of the ingested blastospores. This technique both improves determination of phagocytic indices and checks that extracellular blastospores have been washed away before assessment of intracellular survival and growth.
-------------------------------------

10003699_234 - 0.856511437895 - technology_and_computing
[control, converter, bidirectional]

A Control Technique for Bidirectional Dual Active Bridge DC-DC converter
This paper presents a new bidirectional current control for the dual active bridge (DAB) DC-DC converter and some preliminary investigations are undertaken to show its operation. The SABER simulation model is described for bidirectional control under square-wave mode of operation of the converter. The performance of the converter and the proposed control was verified through extensive SABER simulations corresponding to steady-state and transient conditions.
-------------------------------------

10008662_234 - 0.758028064052 - science
[mutation, pik3ca, cfdna, cancer, breast, tumour, patient, pi3k]

Detection of PIK3CA mutations in circulating free DNA in patients with breast cancer.
Somatic mutations in PIK3CA (encoding a class I phosphoinositide 3 kinase (PI3K) subunit) modulate PI3K signalling to influence tumour behaviour and occur in up to 40% of breast cancers. Inhibitors of PI3K signalling are entering clinical trials, but the impact of PIKC3A mutation on tumour response has yet to be clarified. This study investigated the potential utility of circulating free DNA (cfDNA) as a source for PIK3CA mutation detection in patients with breast cancer. cfDNA extracted (QIAamp Virus spin kit) from blood and matched archival tumour from 46 patients with metastatic breast cancer and 30 patients with localised, operable breast cancer was assessed for hotspot PIK3CA mutations using Amplification Refractory Mutation System (ARMS()) allele-specific PCR and Scorpion probes. PIK3CA mutations were detected in 13/46 (28%) plasma-derived and 10/46 (21%) serum-derived cfDNA samples from metastatic breast cancer patients. In 41 cases with matched tumour and plasma-derived cfDNA data, concordance (same mutation status in plasma and tumour) was 95%. Where a PIK3CA mutation was present in tumour, the 'pick up' in plasma-derived cfDNA was 80%. PIK3CA mutations were present in tumours from 14/30 (47%) localised breast cancers, but no PIK3CA mutations were detected in matched cfDNA. These data demonstrate feasibility and potential utility of cfDNA for PIK3CA mutation detection in patients with metastatic breast cancer. Studies are underway to qualify PIK3CA mutation in cfDNA as a predictive biomarker allowing patient stratification in clinical trials of mechanism-based therapeutics that target PI3K signalling pathways.
-------------------------------------

10003735_234 - 0.749773309398 - finance
[market, corporate, control, stakeholder, civil, regulatory, pressure, interest]

An Autopoietic Investigation of How the Market for Corporate Control Protects Stakeholder Interests
Although people may accept that a market for corporate control is necessary, the further claim that it protects stakeholder interests is more controversial. Some of this controversy arises from the implication that the market for corporate control must incorporate civil society concerns, to the degree that it then acts as a civil regulatory pressure to protect stakeholder interests. The justification for why this may indeed be the case draws upon autopoietic theory and incorporates three main arguments. These are the market for corporate control, to a degree, already protects stakeholder interests, the market for corporate control is responsive to civil regulatory pressure, and civil regulatory pressure is an inevitable form of regulatory oversight for many market transactions in developed pluralistic societies.
-------------------------------------

10005603_234 - 0.701736125518 - medicine
[bowel, syndrome, irritable, woman, gynaecological]

Gynaecological consultation in patients with the irritable bowel syndrome.
A 12 month follow up study to assess the impact of symptoms suggestive of irritable bowel syndrome in women presenting to gynaecology clinics with pelvic pain is reported. Of 71 women 37 (52%) had symptoms suggestive of irritable bowel syndrome at presentation. A firm gynaecological diagnosis was reached in only three (8%) women positive for irritable bowel syndrome compared with 15 (44%) without (p = 0.002). After 12 months 24 (65%) women with irritable bowel syndrome were still symptomatic compared with 11 (32%) without (p = 0.01). This study shows that women with irritable bowel syndrome frequently attend gynaecological clinics but rarely have gynaecological pathology and the prognosis is poor in terms of resolution of their pain.
-------------------------------------

10007354_234 - 0.958305389304 - science
[enol, nucleophilic]

Tertiary alcohols by tandem β-carbolithiation and N→C aryl migration in enol carbamates.
Enol carbamates (O-vinylcarbamates) derived from aromatic or α,β-unsaturated compounds and bearing an N-aryl substituent undergo carbolithiation by nucleophilic attack at the (nominally nucleophilic) β position of the enol double bond. The resulting carbamate-stabilized allylic, propargylic, or benzylic organolithium rearranges with N→C migration of the N-aryl substituent, creating a quaternary carbon α to O. The products may be readily hydrolyzed to yield multiply branched tertiary alcohols in a one-pot tandem reaction, effectively a polarity-reversed nucleophilic β-alkylation-electrophilic α-arylation of an enol equivalent.
-------------------------------------

10008646_234 - 0.719829864111 - technology_and_computing
[lacti, system, lactococcus]

Engineering of self-sustaining systems: Substituting the yeast glucose transporter plus hexokinase for the Lactococcus lactis phosphotransferase system in a Lactococcus lactis network in silico
Times Cited: 0 Si
-------------------------------------

10010586_234 - 0.854437992433 - science
[metabolic, datum, modeling, time, gene, switch, flux, antibiotic]

Metabolic modeling and analysis of the metabolic switch in Streptomyces coelicolor
Background: The transition from exponential to stationary phase in Streptomyces coelicolor is accompanied by a major metabolic switch and results in a strong activation of secondary metabolism. Here we have explored the underlying reorganization of the metabolome by combining computational predictions based on constraint-based modeling and detailed transcriptomics time course observations.Results: We reconstructed the stoichiometric matrix of S. coelicolor, including the major antibiotic biosynthesis pathways, and performed flux balance analysis to predict flux changes that occur when the cell switches from biomass to antibiotic production. We defined the model input based on observed fermenter culture data and used a dynamically varying objective function to represent the metabolic switch. The predicted fluxes of many genes show highly significant correlation to the time series of the corresponding gene expression data. Individual mispredictions identify novel links between antibiotic production and primary metabolism.Conclusion: Our results show the usefulness of constraint-based modeling for providing a detailed interpretation of time course gene expression data. ?? 2010 Alam et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd.
-------------------------------------

10005666_234 - 0.951600715275 - medicine
[5-httlpr, ibs-d, patient, polymorphism, ibs-c, female, stin2, genotype, sex, frequency]

5-HTTLPR and STin2 polymorphisms in the serotonin transporter gene and irritable bowel syndrome: effect of bowel habit and sex.
BACKGROUND: Conflicting data exist on the association between functional polymorphisms in the serotonin reuptake transporter (SERT) gene (SLC6A4) and irritable bowel syndrome (IBS). This may be partly because of small participant numbers and varying ethnic origin and sex within the cohorts studied. AIM: To reassess the potential association between the SERT polymorphisms 5-HTTLPR and STin2 in both male and female IBS patients with diarrhoea (IBS-D) and constipation (IBS-C) compared with healthy volunteers. METHODS: In this case-control study, 196 Caucasian Rome II IBS patients 97 IBS-D (aged 18-66 years; 67 female) and 99 IBS-C (aged 18-65 years; 95 female) and 92 Caucasian healthy volunteers (aged 18-63 years; 60 female) from the UK had genomic DNA extracted from peripheral blood and the 5-HTTLPR and STin2 polymorphisms genotyped. RESULTS: The frequency of the 5-HTTLPR (ss) genotype was slightly lower in both IBS-D (16.5%) and IBS-C (14.3%) patients compared with controls (23.9%), although not significantly (P<or=0.191). This seemed to be related to a reduction in the frequency of the 5-HTTLPR (ss) genotype in male patients, particularly those with IBS-D IBS-D 10%, IBS-C 25%, controls 37.5%; P=0.01 for IBS-D vs. controls; odds ratio (95% confidence interval) for 5-HTTLPR (ss) vs. 5-HTTLPR (non-ss)=0.185 (0.046-0.744) than in female patients (IBS-D 19.4%, IBS-C 13.8%, controls 16.7%). There were no differences in the frequencies of either the 5-HTTLPR (ll) or (ls), or STin2 genotypes between any of the three groups. CONCLUSION: Our finding that male IBS-D patients have a reduced frequency of the 5-HTTLPR (ss) genotype contradicts three earlier studies of a similar size, which did not take sex into account. Therefore, replication studies in even larger cohorts, stratifying for sex and endophenotypes, after assessing physiological and psychological traits, are required to unravel the contribution of SERT polymorphisms to the IBS phenotype.
-------------------------------------

10009776_234 - 0.948630244315 - medicine
[patient, treatment, amphotericin, fluconazole]

A comparative study of the efficacy of fluconazole and amphotericin B in the treatment of oropharyngeal candidosis in patients undergoing radiotherapy for head and neck tumours.
Radiotherapy given during treatment of oral and pharyngeal malignancy is frequently associated with colonization of the oral mucosa by Candida species. Treatment of these infections has included topical and systemic agents. In the present study 73 patients with oropharyngeal candidosis were treated with either amphotericin B (10 mg lozenges, four times daily for 14 days, 36 patients) or fluconazole (50 mg daily for 7 days, 37 patients). The yeasts most frequently isolated were C albicans and C glabrata. Clinical signs and symptoms showed improvement at end of treatment in 72% of patients who received amphotericin B compared with 92% of patients who received fluconazole. Mycological cure at end of treatment was achieved in 31% of the amphotericin B group and 46% of patients who received fluconazole. For both treatments the cure rate was less in denture wearers than in non denture wearers.
-------------------------------------

10007186_234 - 0.786115519968 - science
[method, modulus, pile, test, load, concrete]

Critical assessment of pile modulus determination methods
The elastic modulus of a concrete pile is an important parameter for the interpretation of load test results. This paper summarizes and assesses the methods available for its determination. Ten methods have been identified of which four are based on laboratory tests and the remainder on in situ pile instrumentation. Six of the methods have been used to interpret the modulus of a concrete pile subject to an axial load test. From the analyses, it was found that creep strains that developed during load-holding periods can have a significant effect on the modulus value if not allowed for when assessing the measured strain values. Based on a comparison of the derived pile loads the secant modulus method was found to be the most satisfactory. The tangent modulus method was also found to be a useful tool for investigating the effect of a partial steel casing — a feature of the method that has not been discussed before. Surprisingly, the theoretically correct transformed area equation had the worst performance, probably because of the chosen method for obtaining the concrete specimens on site.
-------------------------------------

10009954_234 - 0.924240565574 - medicine
[aspergillosis, fumigatus, patient, allergic, precipitin, asthmatic, antigen, igg, group, elisa]

Evaluation of a rapid enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay for IgG antibodies to Aspergillus fumigatus in the serological diagnosis of allergic aspergillosis.
A range of 6 somatic and culture filtrate antigens of Aspergillus fumigatus were evaluated in a rapid ELISA procedure for anti-A. fumigatus IgG where the component incubation times had been reduced to 10 min. Sera from patients with allergic aspergillosis, patients with suspected allergic aspergillosis, and asthmatic patients with or without A. fumigatus precipitins were tested. For all antigens, levels of anti-A. fumigatus IgG were higher in patients with allergic aspergillosis than in the other 3 groups. Low levels of specific IgG were, however, detected in asthmatic patients who had no precipitins against A. fumigatus. None of the antigen preparations enabled all patients with proven or suspected allergic aspergillosis to be separated from the other 2 groups of asthmatic patients. Positive-negative discrimination in ELISA was achieved by the inclusion of 10 pools of precipitin test-negative sera from the 50 asthmatics without A. fumigatus precipitins. The number of sera that were classed as positive in ELISA ranged from 9 to 15 in the allergic aspergillosis group, depending on the antigen used; in the suspected aspergillosis group, the number of positive reactions ranged from 1 to 8, while in the asthmatics with precipitins, the number ranged from 0 to 2.
-------------------------------------

10004712_234 - 0.759462839751 - medicine
[treatment, drug, baseline, study]

The Drug Treatment Outcomes Research Study (DTORS): research design and baseline data
The Drug Treatment Outcomes Research Study (DTORS) is the more recent of two such major English studies. Over the past decade, a substantial policy shift has emphasised the role of treatment in diverting drug misusing offenders
from the criminal justice system. At the same time, changes in the drug-using population, particularly increasing levels of crack cocaine use, have led to an acute need to evaluate the extent to which drug treatment works. DTORS consists of
three components: the main, quantitative element tracking the treatment progress of N=1,796 drug treatment seekers; qualitative work using data from a sample of treatment seekers and treatment providers; and a cost effectiveness analysis.
This paper provides an overview of the methods used for the main quantitative element; a longitudinal, nationwide, multisite, observational, cohort study using survey interviews to assess the impact of treatment on drug use, offending, and
health. An overview of the DTORS baseline sample is provided and compared with the target population of drug treatment seekers in England. Participants were drug users seeking treatment from community based or residential treatment services, assessed at baseline and followed up over a 12-month period. The baseline DTORS sample was predominantly male (73%) and aged 25 to 34 (47%). Primary problem drugs included heroin (57%) and crack (12%) with drugs used in the month prior to baseline having a mean value of £1,213. 72% committed offences in the 12 months before recruitment, most commonly shoplifting or buying and selling stolen goods.
-------------------------------------

10011520_234 - 0.790767675223 - science
[gene, study, xenopus, embryo, function, method, knockdown]

Reverse genetic studies using antisense morpholino oligonucleotides.
Here we present a protocol, which allows loss-of-function studies in Xenopus embryos using antisense morpholino oligonucleotides (MOs). Gene knockdown studies provide a critical method for assessing gene function in vitro and in vivo. Such studies are currently performed in Xenopus using primarily one of the two main methods: (1) overexpression of dominant negative constructs or (2) inhibition of gene function by using MOs targeting either the initiation of translation or mRNA splicing. While a dominant negative approach is very effective, it often suffers from specificity. Given that MOs target very specific nucleotide sequences in the target RNA, it suffers considerably less from issues of specificity. The most convenient method for introducing MOs into embryos is through microinjection, which is a simple procedure. Therefore, a reverse genetics approach in Xenopus using MOs is an extremely powerful tool to study gene function, particularly when taking advantage of available sequence data in the post-genomic era. Furthermore, given the well-established fate map in Xenopus, it is also very easy to generate mosaic knockdown embryos, where the gene of interest is affected in defined regions of the embryo. Finally it should be noted that MOs can also be used to block miRNA function and processing, so that it provides a convenient method to not only perform gene knockdown studies on protein coding genes, but also noncoding genes. The protocol we describe here is for both Xenopus laevis and Xenopus tropicalis.
-------------------------------------

10011423_234 - 0.885510523431 - science
[azole, gene, insertion, action]

Identification of novel genes conferring altered azole susceptibility                    in Aspergillus fumigatus.
Azoles are currently the mainstay of antifungal treatment both in                        agricultural and in clinical settings. Although the target site of azole                        action is well studied, the basis of azole resistance and the ultimate mode                        of action of the drug in fungi are poorly understood. To gain a deeper                        insight into these aspects of azole action, restriction-mediated plasmid                        integration (REMI) was used to create azole sensitive and resistant strains                        of the clinically important fungus Aspergillus fumigatus. Four azole                        sensitive insertions and four azole-resistant insertions were characterized.                        Three phenotypes could be re-created in wild-type AF210 by reintegration of                        rescued plasmid and a further four could be confirmed by complementation of                        the mutant phenotype with a copy of the wild-type gene predicted to be                        disrupted by the original insertional event. Six insertions were in genes                        not previously associated with azole sensitivity or resistance. Two                        insertions occur in transporter genes that may affect drug efflux, whereas                        others may affect transcriptional regulation of sterol biosynthesis genes                        and NADH metabolism in the mitochondrion. Two insertions are in genes of                        unknown function.
-------------------------------------

10010347_234 - 0.863749450553 - science
[switch, gene, metabolic, antibiotic, expression]

The dynamic architecture of the metabolic switch in Streptomyces coelicolor
Background: During the lifetime of a fermenter culture, the soil bacterium S. coelicolor undergoes a major metabolic switch from exponential growth to antibiotic production. We have studied gene expression patterns during this switch, using a specifically designed Affymetrix genechip and a high-resolution time-series of fermenter-grown samples.Results: Surprisingly, we find that the metabolic switch actually consists of multiple finely orchestrated switching events. Strongly coherent clusters of genes show drastic changes in gene expression already many hours before the classically defined transition phase where the switch from primary to secondary metabolism was expected. The main switch in gene expression takes only 2 hours, and changes in antibiotic biosynthesis genes are delayed relative to the metabolic rearrangements. Furthermore, global variation in morphogenesis genes indicates an involvement of cell differentiation pathways in the decision phase leading up to the commitment to antibiotic biosynthesis.Conclusions: Our study provides the first detailed insights into the complex sequence of early regulatory events during and preceding the major metabolic switch in S. coelicolor, which will form the starting point for future attempts at engineering antibiotic production in a biotechnological setting. ?? 2010 Nieselt et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd.
-------------------------------------

10018281_234 - 0.810596796932 - medicine
[infection, pulmonary]

Amelioration of influenza-induced pathology in mice by coinfection with Trichinella spiralis.
Illness due to respiratory virus infection is often induced by excessive infiltration of cells into pulmonary tissues, leading to airway occlusion. We show here that infection with Trichinella spiralis results in lower levels of tumor necrosis factor in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid and inhibits cellular recruitment into the airways of mice coinfected with influenza A virus. Infiltration of neutrophils and CD4+ and CD8+ lymphocytes was reduced, resulting in animals gaining weight more rapidly following the initial phase of infection. Influenza resulted in a generalized increase in vascular permeability in pulmonary tissues, and this was suppressed by parasite infection, although the effects were restricted to the early phase of trichinosis. Moreover, the number of cells producing interleukin-10 (IL-10), and the local levels of this cytokine, were reduced, suggesting that amelioration of pulmonary pathology by parasite infection occurs independently of IL-10 production.
-------------------------------------

10003324_234 - 0.716977000379 - science
[gene, part, polymorphism, ibs-d, pi-ib, hv, snp, tnfsf15, tnf, expression]

Identifying and testing candidate genetic polymorphisms in the irritable bowel syndrome (IBS): association with TNFSF15 and TNFα
OBJECTIVES: The postinfectious irritable bowel syndrome (PI-IBS) suggests that impaired resolution of inflammation could cause IBS symptoms. The authors hypothesised that polymorphisms in genes whose expression were altered by gastroenteritis might be linked to IBS with diarrhoea (IBS-D) which closely resembles PI-IBS. DESIGN: Part 1: 25 healthy volunteers (HVs), 21 patients 6 months after Campylobacter jejuni infection, 37 IBS-D and 19 IBS with constipation (IBS-C) underwent rectal biopsy for gene expression analysis and peripheral blood mononuclear cell cytokine production assessment. Part 2: Polymorphisms in genes whose expression was altered in Part 1 were assessed in 179 HV, 179 IBS-D, 122 IBS-C and 41 PI-IBS. RESULTS: Part 1: Mucosal expression of seven genes was altered in IBS: CCL11, CCL13, Calpain 8 and TNFSF15 increased while NR1D1, GPR161 and GABRE decreased with similar patterns after infection with C jejuni. Part 2: The authors assessed 21 known single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in these seven genes and one SNP in each of the TNFα and IL-10 genes. Three out of five TNFSF15 SNPs (rs6478108, rs6478109 and rs7848647) showed reduced minor allele frequency (MAF) (0.28, 0.27 and 0.27) in subjects with IBS-D compared with HV (0.38, 0.36 and 0.37; p=0.007, 0.015 and 0.007, respectively) confirming others recent findings. The authors also replicated the previously reported association of the TNFα SNP rs1800629 with PI-IBS which showed an increase in the MAF at 0.30 versus 0.19 for HV (p=0.04). CONCLUSION: IBS-D and PI-IBS patients are associated with TNFSF15 and TNFα genetic polymorphisms which also predispose to Crohn's disease suggesting possible common underlying pathogenesis.
-------------------------------------

10018337_234 - 0.822963432438 - science
[rsv, ctl, cd8, mucosal, peptide, viral, response, mouse, clearance, adjuvant]

Mucosal delivery of a respiratory syncytial virus CTL peptide with enterotoxin-based adjuvants elicits protective, immunopathogenic, and immunoregulatory antiviral CD8+ T cell responses.
In an effort to develop a safe and effective vaccine against respiratory syncytial virus (RSV), we used Escherichia coli heat-labile toxin (LT), and LTK63 (an LT mutant devoid of ADP-ribosyltransferase activity) to elicit murine CD8(+) CTL responses to an intranasally codelivered CTL peptide from the second matrix protein (M2) of RSV. M2(82-90)-specific CD8(+) T cells were detected by IFN-gamma enzyme-linked immunospot and (51)Cr release assay in local and systemic lymph nodes, and their induction was dependent on the use of a mucosal adjuvant. CTL elicited by peptide immunization afforded protection against RSV challenge, but also enhanced weight loss. CTL-mediated viral clearance was not dependent on IFN-gamma since depletion using specific mAb during RSV challenge did not affect cellular recruitment or viral clearance. Depletion of IFN-gamma did, however, reduce the concentration of TNF detected in lung homogenates of challenged mice and largely prevented the weight loss associated with CTL-mediated viral clearance. Mice primed with the attachment glycoprotein (G) develop lung eosinophilia after intranasal RSV challenge. Mucosal peptide vaccination reduced pulmonary eosinophilia in mice subsequently immunized with G and challenged with RSV. These studies emphasize that protective and immunoregulatory CD8(+) CTL responses can be mucosally elicited using enterotoxin-based mucosal adjuvants but that resistance against viral infection may be accompanied by enhanced disease.
-------------------------------------

10011646_234 - 0.863749450553 - science
[switch, gene, metabolic, antibiotic, expression]

The dynamic architecture of the metabolic switch in Streptomyces coelicolor
Background: During the lifetime of a fermenter culture, the soil bacterium S. coelicolor undergoes a major metabolic switch from exponential growth to antibiotic production. We have studied gene expression patterns during this switch, using a specifically designed Affymetrix genechip and a high-resolution time-series of fermenter-grown samples.Results: Surprisingly, we find that the metabolic switch actually consists of multiple finely orchestrated switching events. Strongly coherent clusters of genes show drastic changes in gene expression already many hours before the classically defined transition phase where the switch from primary to secondary metabolism was expected. The main switch in gene expression takes only 2 hours, and changes in antibiotic biosynthesis genes are delayed relative to the metabolic rearrangements. Furthermore, global variation in morphogenesis genes indicates an involvement of cell differentiation pathways in the decision phase leading up to the commitment to antibiotic biosynthesis.Conclusions: Our study provides the first detailed insights into the complex sequence of early regulatory events during and preceding the major metabolic switch in S. coelicolor, which will form the starting point for future attempts at engineering antibiotic production in a biotechnological setting. ?? 2010 Nieselt et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd.
-------------------------------------

10011735_234 - 0.754248423122 - science
[neuron, processor, time, biological]

SpiNNaker: Distributed Computer Engineering for Neuromorphics
SpiNNaker is a biologically-inspired massively-parallel computer architecture optimized specifically for modeling large-scale systems of spiking neurons in biological real time. The biological inspiration is manifest in the lightweight inter-processor communications architecture, which enables a “spike” generated by a neuron modeled on one processor to be transmitted to all of the processors modeling neurons that the source neuron connects to in zero biological time (which we take to be a time much less than a millisecond). The design of such a machine is based upon achieving a balance between the processing power required to execute the neuron and synapse models, the memory hierarchy required to maintain neuron and synapse state sufficiently close to the respective processor, and a communications infrastructure that can meet the latency and bandwidth constraints of the target application.
-------------------------------------

10007951_234 - 0.776443663974 - medicine
[cancer, therapy, disease, colorectal]

How many diseases are colorectal cancer?
The development of personalised therapy and mechanism-targeted agents in oncology mandates the identification of the patient populations most likely to benefit from therapy. This paper discusses the increasing evidence as to the heterogeneity of the group of diseases called colorectal cancer. Differences in the aetiology and epidemiology of proximal and distal cancers are reflected in different clinical behaviour, histopathology, and molecular characteristics of these tumours. This may impact response both to standard cytotoxic therapies and mechanism-targeted agents. This disease heterogeneity leads to challenges in the design of clinical trials to assess novel therapies in the treatment of "colorectal cancer."
-------------------------------------

10003467_234 - 0.793150088505 - science
[astrocyte, loss, disease, neuron]

Neurological diseases as primary gliopathies: a reassessment of neurocentrism.
Diseases of the human brain are almost universally attributed to malfunction or loss of nerve cells. However, a considerable amount of work has, during the last decade, expanded our view on the role of astrocytes in CNS (central nervous system), and this analysis suggests that astrocytes contribute to both initiation and propagation of many (if not all) neurological diseases. Astrocytes provide metabolic and trophic support to neurons and oligodendrocytes. Here, we shall endeavour a broad overviewing of the progress in the field and forward the idea that loss of homoeostatic astroglial function leads to an acute loss of neurons in the setting of acute insults such as ischaemia, whereas more subtle dysfunction of astrocytes over periods of months to years contributes to epilepsy and to progressive loss of neurons in neurodegenerative diseases. The majority of therapeutic drugs currently in clinical use target neuronal receptors, channels or transporters. Future therapeutic efforts may benefit by a stronger focus on the supportive homoeostatic functions of astrocytes.
-------------------------------------

10007008_234 - 0.713300033216 - science
[aerosol, absorption, measurement, organic, scattering, carbon]

Aerosol scattering and absorption during the EUCAARI-LONGREX flights of the Facility for Airborne Atmospheric Measurements (FAAM) BAe-146: can measurements and models agree?
Scattering and absorption by aerosol in anthropogenically perturbed air masses over Europe has been measured using instrumentation flown on the UK's BAe-146-301 large Atmospheric Research Aircraft (ARA) operated by the Facility for Airborne Atmospheric Measurements (FAAM) on 14 flights during the EUCAARI-LONGREX campaign in May 2008. The geographical and temporal variations of the derived shortwave optical properties of aerosol are presented. Values of single scattering albedo of dry aerosol at 550 nm varied considerably from 0.86 to near unity, with a campaign average of 0.93 +/- 0.03. Dry aerosol optical depths ranged from 0.030 +/- 0.009 to 0.24 +/- 0.07. An optical properties closure study comparing calculations from composition data and Mie scattering code with the measured properties is presented. Agreement to within measurement uncertainties of 30\% can be achieved for both scattering and absorption, but the latter is shown to be sensitive to the refractive indices chosen for organic aerosols, and to a lesser extent black carbon, as well as being highly dependent on the accuracy of the absorption measurements. Agreement with the measured absorption can be achieved either if organic carbon is assumed to be weakly absorbing, or if the organic aerosol is purely scattering and the absorption measurement is an overestimate due to the presence of large amounts of organic carbon. Refractive indices could not be inferred conclusively due to this uncertainty, despite the enhancement in methodology compared to previous studies that derived from the use of the black carbon measurements. Hygroscopic growth curves derived from the wet nephelometer indicate moderate water uptake by the aerosol with a campaign mean f (RH) value (ratio in scattering) of 1.5 (range from 1.23 to 1.63) at 80\% relative humidity. This value is qualitatively consistent with the major chemical components of the aerosol measured by the aerosol mass spectrometer, which are primarily mixed organics and nitrate and some sulphate.
-------------------------------------

10005344_234 - 0.702524693098 - medicine
[cause, patient, theme, participant]

The purpose of attributing cause: beliefs about the causes of myocardial infarction.
Patients' beliefs concerning the causes of their illnesses are core to a number of theoretical models of illness behaviour. The current study explored the themes that emerged from patients' accounts of the causes of their first myocardial infarctions (MIs). Semi-structured interviews were conducted with 12 patients within a week of their MI, at a UK district hospital. Transcripts were analysed using interpretative phenomenological analysis. Three researchers noted themes that emerged from each interview, then common themes were selected and refined on the basis of an aggregation of interviews. Three dominant themes emerged: (1) single versus multiple causation, (2) causes as triggers versus underlying dispositions, and (3) the potentially conflicting motives of avoiding blame whilst at the same time, seeking control. Whilst many participants had complex ideas concerning what caused their MI, and could often name several causes, they tended to emphasise the importance of a single cause, which often related to their symptoms. Further, several participants interpreted "cause" in terms of an acute trigger of MI, rather than as a chronic causal factor. Participants were apparently attempting to answer the question about why they had an MI now, leading to talk about single causes that trigger MI. By contrast, much previous research has been concerned with patients' knowledge of "risk factors", considering the production of only a few causes to reflect ignorance. A key process in participants attributing cause appeared to be attempting to avoid blaming themselves or others for their MI, whilst simultaneously seeking to assert control over future recurrence. Analysis of the functions and purposes of causal attribution suggests that patients' focus on blame and control may be both emotionally and behaviourally adaptive, if not necessarily epidemiologically precise. These findings suggest that interventions to change causal attributions may be misguided, and may even be harmful.
-------------------------------------

10003288_234 - 0.878993028268 - science
[cell, mitochondrial, epidermal, stem, chain, function]

The mitochondrial electron transport chain is dispensable for proliferation and differentiation of epidermal progenitor cells.
Tissue stem cells and germ line or embryonic stem cells were shown to have reduced oxidative metabolism, which was proposed to be an adaptive mechanism to reduce damage accumulation caused by reactive oxygen species. However, an alternate explanation is that stem cells are less dependent on specialized cytoplasmic functions compared with differentiated cells, therefore, having a high nuclear-to-cytoplasmic volume ratio and consequently a low mitochondrial content. To determine whether stem cells rely or not on mitochondrial respiration, we selectively ablated the electron transport chain in the basal layer of the epidermis, which includes the epidermal progenitor/stem cells (EPSCs). This was achieved using a loxP-flanked mitochondrial transcription factor A (Tfam) allele in conjunction with a keratin 14 Cre transgene. The epidermis of these animals (Tfam(EKO)) showed a profound depletion of mitochondrial DNA and complete absence of respiratory chain complexes. However, despite a short lifespan due to malnutrition, epidermal development and skin barrier function were not impaired. Differentiation of epidermal layers was normal and no proliferation defect or major increase of apoptosis could be observed. In contrast, mice with an epidermal ablation of prohibitin-2, a scaffold protein in the inner mitochondrial membrane, displayed a dramatic phenotype observable already in utero, with severely impaired skin architecture and barrier function, ultimately causing death from dehydration shortly after birth. In conclusion, we here provide unequivocal evidence that EPSCs, and probably tissue stem cells in general, are independent of the mitochondrial respiratory chain, but still require a functional dynamic mitochondrial compartment.
-------------------------------------

10011789_234 - 0.751950478436 - science
[vein, saphenous, graft, ad5-fmod, human, nih, neointimal, fibromodulin, decorin]

Adenovirus-mediated gene transfer of fibromodulin inhibits neointimal hyperplasia in an organ culture model of human saphenous vein graft disease.
Poor long-term graft patency remains a major limitation of coronary artery bypass grafting using saphenous vein aortocoronary grafts. Neointimal hyperplasia (NIH) represents the principal mechanism of graft failure; a substantial body of evidence implicates transforming growth factor-beta1 (TGF-beta1) in the pathogenesis of NIH. The small leucine-rich proteoglycans decorin and fibromodulin possess TGF-beta-antagonist activity to differing extents and with differing avidities for the isoforms of TGF-beta. We compared their ability to inhibit NIH in an ex vivo model of human saphenous vein organ culture following adenovirus-mediated gene transfer. Surgically prepared human saphenous vein segments received adenovirus expressing fibromodulin (Ad5-Fmod), decorin (Ad5-Dcn), beta-galactosidase (Ad5-lacZ) or vehicle-only. Computerized morphometry 14 days after infection revealed significantly reduced neointimal area, neointimal thickness and intima/media ratio in Ad5-Fmod- and Ad5-Dcn-infected veins. Each parameter was significantly smaller in Ad5-Fmod- than in Ad5-Dcn-exposed segments. Fibrillar collagen content and levels of biologically active TGF-beta were lower in vessels receiving Ad5-Fmod or Ad5-Dcn than in those receiving Ad5-lacZ or vehicle-only. Fibromodulin is a more potent inhibitor of NIH in cultured human saphenous vein than decorin and offers potential therapeutic benefits in saphenous vein graft failure (and possibly in other forms of accelerated atherosclerosis) by reduction of associated neointima formation.Gene Therapy advance online publication, 28 May 2009; doi:10.1038/gt.2009.63.
-------------------------------------

10007497_234 - 0.729475545197 - medicine
[vandetanib, vc, gc, patient]

A phase I study of Vandetanib in combination with vinorelbine/cisplatin or gemcitabine/cisplatin as first-line treatment for advanced non-small cell lung cancer.
INTRODUCTION: Vandetanib is a once-daily oral agent that selectively inhibits vascular endothelial growth factor receptor, epidermal growth factor receptor, and RET (REarranged during Transfection) signaling. METHODS: This Phase I study investigated the safety, tolerability, and pharmacokinetics of vandetanib when administered with either gemcitabine plus cisplatin (GC) or vinorelbine plus cisplatin (VC) in patients with previously untreated locally advanced or metastatic non-small cell lung cancer. RESULTS: Seventeen patients received vandetanib 100 mg/d plus VC (n = 9) or GC (n = 8). Three dose-limiting toxicities were reported in each treatment group: vandetanib + VC (pulmonary artery thrombosis and asymptomatic QTc prolongation n = 2); vandetanib + GC (peripheral ischemia due to arterial occlusion, pulmonary embolism, and limb venous thrombosis). The protocol definition of a tolerable dose was not met, and no patients were recruited to receive vandetanib 300 mg plus VC or GC. There was no apparent pharmacokinetic interaction between vandetanib and vinorelbine or gemcitabine, but there was an approximate 30% increase in the exposure to cisplatin, which may be due to accumulation of total platinum and/or an interaction with vandetanib. CONCLUSIONS: In this study, in patients with previously untreated advanced non-small cell lung cancer, vandetanib 100 mg/d in combination with either VC or GC was not tolerated.
-------------------------------------

10010300_234 - 0.802139971183 - science
[actinomycete, essential, metabolic, enzyme, core, network, species, genome-scale, model, comparative]

Comparative genome-scale metabolic modeling of actinomycetes: The topology of essential core metabolism
Actinomycetes are highly important bacteria. On one hand, some of them cause severe human and plant diseases, on the other hand, many species are known for their ability to produce antibiotics. Here we report the results of a comparative analysis of genome-scale metabolic models of 37 species of actinomycetes. Based on in silico knockouts we generated topological and genomic maps for each organism. Combining the collection of genome-wide models, we constructed a global enzyme association network to identify both a conserved "core network" and an "essential core network" of the entire group. As has been reported for low-degree metabolites in several organisms, low-degree enzymes (in linear pathways) turn out to be generally more essential than high-degree enzymes (in metabolic hubs). ?? 2011 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
-------------------------------------

10005612_234 - 0.873918964456 - medicine
[predominant, patient, diarrhoea, constipation, control, bowel, rectum, syndrome, rectal, irritable]

Anorectal manometry in irritable bowel syndrome: differences between diarrhoea and constipation predominant subjects.
Anorectal manometry with balloon distension was performed on 28 patients with diarrhoea predominant irritable bowel syndrome, 27 patients with constipation predominant irritable bowel syndrome and 30 normal controls. In the diarrhoea predominant group balloon volumes required to perceive the sensations of gas, stool, urgency of defecation and discomfort were significantly lower than in controls or constipation predominant patients (p less than 0.001). Diarrhoea predominant patients also had a significantly lower rectal compliance than controls or constipation predominant patients (p less than 0.03) but showed no difference in motor activity induced by distension. When the constipation predominant patients were compared with controls the only significant difference that emerged was in the volume at which discomfort was perceived. No significant differences between constipated subjects and controls were found in the distension induced motor activity. Symptom severity and psychological parameters were also recorded and the diarrhoea predominant patients were found to be more anxious than those with constipation (p = 0.04). It proved possible (by comparison with the control group) to identify three abnormal rectal subtypes in patients with irritable bowel syndrome. These were a sensitive rectum (low sensation thresholds, normal or low rectal pressure), a stiff rectum (normal or low sensation thresholds, high pressure) and an insensitive rectum (high sensation thresholds, normal or high pressure) and their distribution varied considerably depending on bowel habit. Some form of rectal abnormality was identified in 75% of diarrhoea predominant patients compared with 30% of constipation predominant subjects (p = 0.002). A sensitive rectum was a particular feature of diarrhoea predominant patients being observed in 57% of patients compared with only 7% of the constipated group (p less than 0.001).
-------------------------------------

10003930_234 - 0.94652524264 - medicine
[patient, sepsis, study, ck18, biomarker, caspase-cleaved, level, elisa, ndna]

A pilot study assessing the prognostic value of CK18 and nDNA biomarkers in severe sepsis patients
BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES:

Severe sepsis and septic shock have posed significant treatment challenges for many years. Recently, a number of circulating apoptosis biomarkers have emerged, such as full-length and caspase-cleaved cytokeratin 18 (CK18) and nucleosomal DNA (nDNA), that may be predictive of likely outcome. This non-interventional study aimed to assess the ability of enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (ELISAs) for these biomarkers to provide clinically useful information to guide the management of sepsis.
METHODS:

This study was conducted in patients admitted to the intensive care unit with severe sepsis at five US centres. Blood samples for assessment of plasma levels of full-length CK18 (measured by the M65® ELISA) and caspase-cleaved CK18 (measured by the M30-Apoptosense® ELISA) and nDNA (measured by ELISA) were collected from patients within 2 hours of consent (baseline) and on days 2, 4 and 8. Blood samples from 17 healthy volunteers acted as controls. Levels of each biomarker were presented descriptively.
RESULTS:

A total of 22 patients (mean age 60 range, 24-83 years; 50% male) were included in the study. The mean APACHE II score was 24.4 (range 7-50). One-third of patients had three organ system failures and over one-half had septic shock. Three patients died during the study. Full-length and caspase-cleaved CK18 levels decreased within 48 hours following initiation of treatment of sepsis in patients who survived, whereas increases were observed in the same timeframe in patients who died within 28 days of admission. Baseline nDNA and total soluble CK18 levels (caspase-cleaved and total intact) were significantly (p ≤ 0.05) higher in patients who required renal support than those who did not.
CONCLUSIONS:

Despite the small numbers of subjects assessed in the current study, these results confirm that measurement of apoptosis biomarkers may help to provide clinically useful information to manage sepsis and expedite development of novel therapeutics. However, further investigations to fully assess their prognostic value are required.
-------------------------------------

10003973_234 - 0.757372629241 - science
[times, study, structural, spectroscopic, r3pi2, tris-aryl, adduct]

A structural and spectroscopic study of tris-aryl substituted R3PI2 adducts
Times Cited: 1
-------------------------------------

10008770_234 - 0.762096153248 - science
[voriconazole, galactomannan, eucast, breakpoint, methodology, concentration, dynamic, model, mic, susceptibility]

Pharmacodynamics of voriconazole in a dynamic in vitro model of invasive pulmonary aspergillosis: implications for in vitro susceptibility breakpoints.
BACKGROUND: Voriconazole is a first-line agent for the treatment of invasive pulmonary aspergillosis (IPA). There are increasing reports of Aspergillus fumigatus isolates with reduced susceptibility to voriconazole. METHODS: An in vitro dynamic model of IPA was developed that enabled simulation of human-like voriconazole pharmacokinetics. Galactomannan was used as a biomarker. The pharmacodynamics of voriconazole against wild-type and 3 resistant strains of A. fumigatus were defined. The results were bridged to humans to provide decision support for setting breakpoints for voriconazole using Clinical Laboratory Standards Institute (CLSI) and European Committee of Antimicrobial Susceptibility Testing (EUCAST) methodologies. RESULTS: Isolates with higher minimum inhibitory concentrations (MICs) required higher area under the concentration time curves (AUCs) to achieve suppression of galactomannan. Using CLSI and EUCAST methodologies, the AUC:MIC values that achieved suppression of galactomannan were 55 and 32.1, respectively. Using CLSI and EUCAST methodologies, the trough concentration:MIC values that achieved suppression of galactomannan were 1.68 and 1, respectively. Potential CLSI breakpoints for voriconazole are ≤ 0.5 mg/L for susceptible and >1 mg/L for resistant. Potential EUCAST breakpoints for voriconazole are ≤1 mg/L for susceptible and >2 mg/L for resistant. CONCLUSIONS: This dynamic model of IPA is a useful tool to address many remaining questions related to antifungal treatment of Aspergillus spp.
-------------------------------------

10004866_234 - 0.724702497466 - medicine
[clozapine, drug, antipsychotic, sga, schizophrenia, advantage]

Randomized controlled trial of effect of prescription of clozapine versus other second-generation antipsychotic drugs in resistant schizophrenia
There is good evidence that clozapine is more efficacious than first-generation antipsychotic drugs in resistant schizophrenia. It is less clear if clozapine is more effective than the other second-generation antipsychotic (SGA) drugs. A noncommercially funded, pragmatic, open, multisite, randomized controlled trial was conducted in the United Kingdom National Health Service (NHS). Participantswere 136 people aged 18–65 with DSM-IV schizophrenia and related disorders whose medication was being changed because of poor clinical response to 2 or more previous antipsychotic drugs. Participants were randomly allocated to clozapine or to one of the class of other SGA drugs (risperidone, olanzapine, quetiapine, amisulpride) as selected by the managing clinician. Outcomes were assessed blind to treatment allocation. One-year assessments were carried out in 87% of the sample. The intent to treat comparison showed no statistically significant advantage for commencing clozapine in Quality of Life score (3.63 points; CI: 0.46–7.71; p = .08) but did show an advantage in Positive and Negative Syndrome Scale (PANSS) total score that was statistically significant (–4.93 points; CI: -8.82 to -1.05; p = .013) during follow-up. Clozapine showed a trend toward having fewer total extrapyramidal side effects. At 12 weeks participants who were receiving clozapine reported that their mental health was significantlybetter compared with those receiving other SGA drugs. In conclusion, in people with schizophrenia with poor treatment response to 2 or more antipsychotic drugs,there is an advantage to commencing clozapine rather than other SGA drugs in terms of symptom improvement over 1 year.
-------------------------------------

10005574_234 - 0.926987876799 - medicine
[bowel, patient, irritable, control, syndrome]

Bladder smooth muscle dysfunction in patients with irritable bowel syndrome.
Urodynamic studies were carried out on 30 patients with irritable bowel syndrome and 30 matched controls. Fifty per cent of the irritable bowel patients compared with only 13% of the control group had evidence of bladder dysfunction (p = 0.006). In the irritable bowel group detrusor instability was observed in 10 patients compared with only one control subject (p = 0.008). A steep cystometrogram occurred in five irritable bowel patients and three controls (NS). Detrusor instability was most common in patients with a bowel habit characterised by alternating constipation and diarrhoea. This is the first study to provide objective evidence that patients with irritable bowel syndrome may have a disorder of smooth muscle or its innervation that is not confined to the gastrointestinal system.
-------------------------------------

10005101_234 - 0.867577622895 - science
[ventral, domain, basal, ganglion, input, computational, dopamine, striatum]

The ventral basal ganglia, a selection mechanism at the crossroads of space, strategy, and reward
The basal ganglia are often conceptualised as three parallel domains that include all the constituent nuclei. The 'ventral domain' appears to be critical for learning flexible behaviours for exploration and foraging, as it is the recipient of converging inputs from amygdala, hippocampal formation and prefrontal cortex, putatively centres for stimulus evaluation, spatial navigation, and planning/contingency, respectively. However, compared to work on the dorsal domains, the rich potential for quantitative theories and models of the ventral domain remains largely untapped, and the purpose of this review is to provide the stimulus for this work. We systematically review the ventral domain's structures and internal organisation, and propose a functional architecture as the basis for computational models. Using a full schematic of the structure of inputs to the ventral striatum (nucleus accumbens core and shell), we argue for the existence of many identifiable processing channels on the basis of unique combinations of afferent inputs. We then identify the potential information represented in these channels by reconciling a broad range of studies from the hippocampal, amygdala and prefrontal cortex literatures with known properties of the ventral striatum from lesion, pharmacological, and electrophysiological studies. Dopamine's key role in learning is reviewed within the three current major computational frameworks; we also show that the shell-based basal ganglia sub-circuits are well placed to generate the phasic burst and dip responses of dopaminergic neurons. We detail dopamine's modulation of ventral basal ganglia's inputs by its actions on pre-synaptic terminals and post-synaptic membranes in the striatum, arguing that the complexity of these effects hint at computational roles for dopamine beyond current ideas. The ventral basal ganglia are revealed as a constellation of multiple functional systems for the learning and selection of flexible behaviours and of behavioural strategies, sharing the common operations of selection-by-disinhibition and of dopaminergic modulation.
-------------------------------------

10009716_234 - 0.826612856161 - science
[isolate, resistant, resistance, azole, fumigatus, mechanism]

Azole antifungal resistance in Aspergillus fumigatus: 2008 and 2009.
OBJECTIVES: Resistance to azole antifungal drugs in Aspergillus fumigatus is now a major clinical problem in some locations. Here we update our previous experience with data from 2008-09. METHODS: We tested all A. fumigatus isolates submitted to the Mycology Reference Centre Manchester in 2008 and 2009 for susceptibility to itraconazole, voriconazole and posaconazole. We undertook CYP51A sequencing for most of the azole-resistant isolates. RESULTS: Of 230 isolates, 64 (28%) were azole resistant. In 2008 and 2009, 14% and 20% of patients had resistant isolates, respectively. During this period 62 of 64 (97%) were itraconazole resistant, 2 of 64 (3%) were only voriconazole resistant and 78% of cases were multi-azole resistant. Forty-three percent of isolates did not carry a cyp51A mutation (previously the most common azole resistance mechanism), indicating that other mechanisms must be responsible and are increasing in frequency. CONCLUSIONS: Azole resistance is evolving and growing in frequency. Established and novel mechanisms may be responsible.
-------------------------------------

10007856_234 - 0.81534655681 - science
[particle, cloud, aerosol, organic, droplet, concentration, ambient, effect, compound]

Tight coupling of particle size, number and composition in atmospheric cloud droplet activation
The substantial uncertainty in the indirect effect of aerosol particles on radiative forcing in large part arises from the influences of atmospheric aerosol particles on (i) the brightness of clouds, exerting significant shortwave cooling with no appreciable compensation in the long wave, and on (ii) their ability to precipitate, with implications for cloud cover and lifetime.Predicting the ambient conditions at which aerosol parti- cles may become cloud droplets is largely reliant on an equilibrium relationship derived by Ko ̈hler (1936). However, the theoretical basis of the relationship restricts its application to particles solely comprising involatile compounds and wa- ter, whereas a substantial fraction of particles in the real at- mosphere will contain potentially thousands of semi-volatile organic compounds in addition to containing semi-volatile inorganic components such as ammonium nitrate.We show that equilibration of atmospherically reasonable concentrations of organic compounds with a growing particle as the ambient humidity increases has potentially larger implications on cloud droplet formation than any other equilibrium compositional dependence, owing to inextricable linkage between the aerosol composition, a particles size and concentration under ambient conditions.Whilst previous attempts to account for co-condensation of gases other than water vapour have been restricted to one inorganic condensate, our method demonstrates that accounting for the co-condensation of any number of organic com- pounds substantially decreases the saturation ratio of wa- ter vapour required for droplet activation. This effect is far greater than any other compositional dependence; more so even than the unphysical effect of surface tension reductionin aqueous organic mixtures, ignoring differences in bulk and surface surfactant concentrations.
-------------------------------------

10003317_234 - 0.777097642672 - technology_and_computing
[delay, asynchronous, sdram, circuit, datum, digital, conference, ddr]

An Asynchronous Fully Digital Delay Locked Loop for DDR SDRAM Data Recovery
Browse Conference Publications > Asynchronous Circuits and Sys ...HelpAn Asynchronous Fully Digital Delay Locked Loop for DDR SDRAM Data RecoveryThis paper appears in:Asynchronous Circuits and Systems (ASYNC), 2012 18th IEEE International Symposium onDate of Conference: 7-9 May 2012Author(s): Garside, J.D.Furber, S.B. ;  Temple, S. ;  Clark, D.M. ;  Plana, L.A.Page(s): 49 - 56Product Type: Conference Publications    * Access Full Text in PDF    * 6243881 searchabstract Download Citations    * Email    * Print    * Rights And Permissions    * Save to Project    *AbstractDelay Locked Loops (DLLs) have become a standard structure in IC design, providing programmable, calibrated on-chip delays. They can be used, for example, to deskew clocks by matching delay paths. One application is in data recovery from DDR SDRAMs whose data strobe edges need retarding to provide adequate setup times for latching read data. The DLL described here was developed as a solution to this problem. It is wholly amenable to implementation on a purely digital CMOS device using standard cells. The authors' background in self-timed circuits led to a novel, compact design - particularly in regard of the phase detector - which can have adjustable hysteresis to avoid jitter. The unit achieves lock rapidly and can subsequently track environmental variations without pausing operation for recalibration. It has been fabricated in 130 nm CMOS and is in use in a SoC SDRAM interface.
-------------------------------------

10008049_234 - 0.871556489116 - science
[proinsulin, t2d, insulin, level, fasting, glucose, locus]

Genome-wide association identifies nine common variants associated with fasting proinsulin levels and provides new insights into the pathophysiology of type 2 diabetes.
OBJECTIVE: Proinsulin is a precursor of mature insulin and C-peptide. Higher circulating proinsulin levels are associated with impaired β-cell function, raised glucose levels, insulin resistance, and type 2 diabetes (T2D). Studies of the insulin processing pathway could provide new insights about T2D pathophysiology. RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: We have conducted a meta-analysis of genome-wide association tests of ∼2.5 million genotyped or imputed single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and fasting proinsulin levels in 10,701 nondiabetic adults of European ancestry, with follow-up of 23 loci in up to 16,378 individuals, using additive genetic models adjusted for age, sex, fasting insulin, and study-specific covariates. RESULTS: Nine SNPs at eight loci were associated with proinsulin levels (P < 5 × 10(-8)). Two loci (LARP6 and SGSM2) have not been previously related to metabolic traits, one (MADD) has been associated with fasting glucose, one (PCSK1) has been implicated in obesity, and four (TCF7L2, SLC30A8, VPS13C/C2CD4A/B, and ARAP1, formerly CENTD2) increase T2D risk. The proinsulin-raising allele of ARAP1 was associated with a lower fasting glucose (P = 1.7 × 10(-4)), improved β-cell function (P = 1.1 × 10(-5)), and lower risk of T2D (odds ratio 0.88; P = 7.8 × 10(-6)). Notably, PCSK1 encodes the protein prohormone convertase 1/3, the first enzyme in the insulin processing pathway. A genotype score composed of the nine proinsulin-raising alleles was not associated with coronary disease in two large case-control datasets. CONCLUSIONS: We have identified nine genetic variants associated with fasting proinsulin. Our findings illuminate the biology underlying glucose homeostasis and T2D development in humans and argue against a direct role of proinsulin in coronary artery disease pathogenesis.
-------------------------------------

10009616_234 - 0.762311347834 - science
[biomarker, response, imaging, therapeutics, mri]

False-negative MRI biomarkers of tumour response to targeted cancer therapeutics.
BACKGROUND: Non-invasive quantitative imaging biomarkers are essential for the evaluation of novel targeted therapeutics. Before deployment in clinical trials, such imaging biomarkers require qualification, typically through pre-clinical identification of imaging-pathology correlates. METHODS: First, in investigating imaging biomarkers of invasion, the response of orthotopic murine PC3 prostate xenografts to the Src inhibitor saracatinib was assessed using susceptibility contrast MRI. Second, the longitudinal response of chemically induced rat mammary adenocarcinomas to the VEGFR2 inhibitor vandetanib was monitored by intrinsic susceptibility MRI, to identify the time window of transient vascular normalisation. RESULTS: No significant differences in fractional blood volume (%), vessel calibre (μm), native T(1) (ms) or apparent water diffusion coefficient were determined, despite reduced expression of activated Fak and paxillin in the saracatinib cohort. Treatment with vandetanib elicited a 60% antitumour response (P<0.01), 80% inhibition in vessel density (P<0.05) and reduction in hypoxia (P<0.05). There was, however, no significant change in tumour baseline R(2)* (s(-1)) or carbogen-induced ΔR(2)* with treatment. CONCLUSION: Reporting negative imaging biomarker responses is important, to avoid the risk of clinical trials using the same biomarkers being undertaken with a false expectation of success, and the abandonment of promising new therapeutics based on a false-negative imaging biomarker response being mistaken for a true-negative.
-------------------------------------

10004766_234 - 0.936541690516 - medicine
[cough, chronic, patient, volunteer, infection, healthy]

PCR based bronchoscopic detection of common respiratory pathogens in chronic cough: a case control study.
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Viral respiratory tract infection is the most frequent cause of acute cough and is reported at onset in about one third of patients with chronic cough. Persistent infection is therefore one possible explanation for the cough reflex hypersensitivity and pulmonary inflammation reported in chronic cough patients. METHODS: Bronchoscopic endobronchial biopsies and bronchoalveolar lavage cell counts were obtained from ten healthy volunteers and twenty treatment resistant chronic cough patients (10 selected for lavage lymphocytosis). A screen for known respiratory pathogens was performed on biopsy tissue. Chronic cough patients also underwent cough reflex sensitivity testing using citric acid. RESULTS: There was no significant difference in incidence of infection between healthy volunteers and chronic cough patients (p = 0.115) or non-lymphocytic and lymphocytic groups (p = 0.404). BAL cell percentages were not significantly different between healthy volunteers and chronic cough patients without lymphocytosis. Lymphocytic patients however had a significantly raised percentage of lymphocytes (p < 0.01), neutrophils (p < 0.05), eosinophils (p < 0.05) and decreased macrophages (p < 0.001) verses healthy volunteers. There was no significant difference in the cough reflex sensitivity between non-lymphocytic and lymphocytic patients (p = 0.536). CONCLUSIONS: This study indicates latent infection in the lung is unlikely to play an important role in chronic cough, but a role for undetected or undetectable pathogens in either the lung or a distal site could not be ruled out.Trials registrationCurrent Controlled Trials ISRCTN62337037 & ISRCTN40147207.
-------------------------------------

10018361_234 - 0.717417539404 - medicine
[infection, mouse, rsv, lung, virus, vaccination]

Influenza virus lung infection protects from respiratory syncytial virus-induced immunopathology.
The effect of infection history is ignored in most animal models of infectious disease. The attachment protein of respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) induces T helper cell type 2-driven pulmonary eosinophilia in mice similar to that seen in the failed infant vaccinations in the 1960s. We show that previous influenza virus infection of mice: (a) protects against weight loss, illness, and lung eosinophilia; (b) attenuates recruitment of inflammatory cells; and (c) reduces cytokine secretion caused by RSV attachment protein without affecting RSV clearance. This protective effect can be transferred via influenza-immune splenocytes to naive mice and is long lived. Previous immunity to lung infection clearly plays an important and underestimated role in subsequent vaccination and infection. The data have important implications for the timing of vaccinations in certain patient groups, and may contribute to variability in disease susceptibility observed in humans.
-------------------------------------

10005253_234 - 0.914179468119 - science
[keloid, senescence, scar, fibroblast]

Cellular senescence as a possible mechanism for halting progression of keloid lesions.
Keloid scarring is a consequence of aberrant wound healing that leads to expansion of the scar beyond the confines of the skin injury. Keloid scars are characterized by excessive extracellular matrix disposition, prolonged proliferation of fibroblasts, increased angiogenesis, and inflammatory cell infiltration. There is no single satisfactory treatment for keloid, and it can lead to severe disfigurements and bodily dysfunction. Thus, clarification of the mechanisms underlying keloid formation, as well as those that prevent it from behaving as a malignant tumor, has significant consequences not only for treatment of keloid but also for the prevention of malignant tumor formation. Senescence is an irreversible form of growth arrest that has been shown to play a role, both in vitro and in vivo, in preventing malignant tumorigenesis upon oncogenic stress. In this study it is shown that fibroblasts embedded inside keloid scars proliferate at a slower rate compared with either those residing at the proliferative edges of the scar or normal fibroblasts. Likewise it is demonstrated that keloid fibroblasts exhibit a cell-cycle arrest with a G2/M DNA content and a higher rate of senescence. The results also indicate that levels of the tumor suppressor protein PML are higher in the active regions of keloid. The study therefore suggests that senescence is one possible mechanism by which keloid is maintained in a benign state. On this basis, "pro-senescence therapy" should be taken into consideration when designing treatment strategies for keloid.
-------------------------------------

10009403_234 - 0.807616463922 - science
[rfm, placental, fetal, placenta, structure, woman, function, movement, insufficiency, maternal]

Maternal Perception of Reduced Fetal Movements Is Associated with Altered Placental Structure and Function
BACKGROUND: Maternal perception of reduced fetal movement (RFM) is associated with increased risk of stillbirth and fetal growth restriction (FGR). DFM is thought to represent fetal compensation to conserve energy due to insufficient oxygen and nutrient transfer resulting from placental insufficiency. To date there have been no studies of placental structure in cases of DFM. OBJECTIVE: To determine whether maternal perception of reduced fetal movements (RFM) is associated with abnormalities in placental structure and function. DESIGN: Placentas were collected from women with RFM after 28 weeks gestation if delivery occurred within 1 week. Women with normal movements served as a control group. Placentas were weighed and photographs taken. Microscopic structure was evaluated by immunohistochemical staining and image analysis. System A amino acid transporter activity was measured as a marker of placental function. Placentas from all pregnancies with RFM (irrespective of outcome) had greater area with signs of infarction (3.5% vs. 0.6%; p<0.01), a higher density of syncytial knots (p<0.001) and greater proliferation index (p<0.01). Villous vascularity (p<0.001), trophoblast area (p<0.01) and system A activity (p<0.01) were decreased in placentas from RFM compared to controls irrespective of outcome of pregnancy. CONCLUSIONS: This study provides evidence of abnormal placental morphology and function in women with RFM and supports the proposition of a causal association between placental insufficiency and RFM. This suggests that women presenting with RFM require further investigation to identify those with placental insufficiency.
-------------------------------------

10005172_234 - 0.734849277825 - technology_and_computing
[3-d, circuit, design, methodology, vertical]

Interconnect-Based Design Methodologies for Three-Dimensional Integrated Circuits
Browse Journals & Magazines > Proceedings of the IEEE ...> Volume:97 Issue:1Prev | Back to ResultsHelpInterconnect-Based Design Methodologies for Three-Dimensional Integrated CircuitsThis paper appears in:Proceedings of the IEEEDate of Publication: Jan. 2009Author(s): Pavlidis, V.F.Dept. of Electr. & Comput. Eng., Univ. of Rochester, Rochester, NYFriedman, E.G.Volume: 97 , Issue: 1Page(s): 123 - 140Product Type: Journals & Magazines * Access Full Text in PDF * 1 1 4796277 searchabstract Download Citations * Email * Print * Rights And Permissions * Save to Project *AbstractDesign techniques for three-dimensional (3-D) ICs considerably lag the significant strides achieved in 3-D manufacturing technologies. Advanced design methodologies for two-dimensional circuits are not sufficient to manage the added complexity caused by the third dimension. Consequently, design methodologies that efficiently handle the added complexity and inherent heterogeneity of 3-D circuits are necessary. These 3-D design methodologies should support robust and reliable 3-D circuits while considering different forms of vertical integration, such as system-in-package and 3-D ICs with fine grain vertical interconnections. Global signaling issues, such as clock and power distribution networks, are further exacerbated in vertical integration due to the limited number of package pins, the distance of these pins from other planes within the 3-D system, and the impedance characteristics of the through silicon vias (TSVs). In addition to these dedicated networks, global signaling techniques that incorporate the diverse traits of complex 3-D systems are required. One possible approach, potentially significantly reducing the complexity of interconnect issues in 3-D circuits, is 3-D networks-on-chip (NoC). Design methodologies that exploit the diversity of 3-D structures to further enhance the performance of multiplane integrated systems are necessary. The longest interconnects within a 3-D circuit are those interconnects comprising several TSVs and traversing multiple physical planes. Consequently, minimizing the delay of the interplane nets is of great importance. By considering the nonuniform impedance characteristics of the interplane interconnects while placing the TSVs, the delay of these nets is decreased. In addition, the difference in electrical behavior between the horizontal and vertical interconnects suggests that asymmetric structures can be useful candidates for distributing the clock signal within a 3-D circuit. A 3-D test circuit fabricated with a 180 nm si- - licon-on-insulator (SOI) technology, manufactured by MIT Lincoln Laboratories, exploring several clock distribution topologies is described. Correct operation at 1 GHz has been demonstrated. Several 3-D NoC topologies incorporating dissimilar 3-D interconnect structures are reviewed as a promising solution for communication limited systems-on-chip (SoC). Appropriate performance models are described to evaluate these topologies. Several forms of vertical integration, such as system-in-package and different candidate technologies for 3-D circuits, such as SOI, are considered. The techniques described in this paper address fundamental interconnect structures in the 3-D design process. Several interesting research problems in the design of 3-D circuits are also discussed.
-------------------------------------

10018107_234 - 0.802893337567 - science
[model, tissue, mutation, ventricular, n588k, re-entrant, transmural, wave]

Increased vulnerability of human ventricle to re-entrant excitation in hERG-linked variant 1 short QT syndrome.
The short QT syndrome (SQTS) is a genetically heterogeneous condition characterized by abbreviated QT intervals and an increased susceptibility to arrhythmia and sudden death. This simulation study identifies arrhythmogenic mechanisms in the rapid-delayed rectifier K(+) current (I(Kr))-linked SQT1 variant of the SQTS. Markov chain (MC) models were found to be superior to Hodgkin-Huxley (HH) models in reproducing experimental data regarding effects of the N588K mutation on KCNH2-encoded hERG. These ionic channel models were then incorporated into human ventricular action potential (AP) models and into 1D and 2D idealised and realistic transmural ventricular tissue simulations and into a 3D anatomical model. In single cell models, the N588K mutation abbreviated ventricular cell AP duration at 90% repolarization (APD(90)) and decreased the maximal transmural voltage heterogeneity (δV) during APs. This resulted in decreased transmural heterogeneity of APD(90) and of the effective refractory period (ERP): effects that are anticipated to be anti-arrhythmic rather than pro-arrhythmic. However, with consideration of transmural heterogeneity of I(Kr) density in the intact tissue model based on the ten Tusscher-Noble-Noble-Panfilov ventricular model, not only did the N588K mutation lead to QT-shortening and increases in T-wave amplitude, but δV was found to be augmented in some local regions of ventricle tissue, resulting in increased tissue vulnerability for uni-directional conduction block and predisposing to formation of re-entrant excitation waves. In 2D and 3D tissue models, the N588K mutation facilitated and maintained re-entrant excitation waves due to the reduced substrate size necessary for sustaining re-entry. Thus, in SQT1 the N588K-hERG mutation facilitates initiation and maintenance of ventricular re-entry, increasing the lifespan of re-entrant spiral waves and the stability of scroll waves in 3D tissue.
-------------------------------------

10011610_234 - 0.935852164855 - science
[tio2, pyrocatechol, anatase, surface, adsorption, rutile, nexaf, molecule, state]

Adsorbate-induced Modification of Surface Electronic Structure: Pyrocatechol Adsorption on the Anatase TiO2 (101) and Rutile TiO2 (110) Surfaces
Photoemission and near-edge X-ray absorption fine structure (NEXAFS) techniques have been used to study the adsorption of pyrocatechol on anatase TiO2 (101) and rutile TiO2 (110) single crystals. Photoemission results suggest the pyrocatechol molecule adsorbs on both surfaces predominantly in a bidentate geometry. Using the searchlight effect, the carbon K-edge NEXAFS spectra recorded for pyrocatechol on anatase TiO2 (101) and rutile TiO2 (110) show the phenyl rings in the pyrocatechol molecule to be oriented  at 27°±6° and 23°±8° respectively from the surface normal.  Experimental data and computational models of the pyrocatechol-anatase TiO2 interface indicate the appearance of new occupied and unoccupied states on adsorption due to hybridisation between the electronic states of the pyrocatechol molecule and the surface. The atomic character of the new orbitals created facilitates direct photoinjection  from pyrocatechol into  anatase TiO2 and induces a strong final state effect in the carbon K-edge NEXAFS spectrum.
-------------------------------------

10004017_234 - 0.746306272469 - science
[pv, anomaly, layer, precipitation, convective, convection, case, dry, deep, complex]

Large scale potential vorticity anomalies and deep convection.
The effect on deep convection of large-scale potential vorticity (PV) anomalies and their associated tropospheric stable layers is complex and not well understood. This article examines the meteorological events of 9 July 2007 (IOP7b of the Convective and Orographically-induced Precipitation Study (COPS)), which was dominated by an upper-level PV anomaly that stretched from the UK to southern France and as far northeast as Denmark. Three precipitation regions were identified from the case: lines of intense storms beneath the PV anomaly; less intense, more widespread convective precipitation to the east of the PV anomaly; and, in between, a region of no precipitation. The latter of these coincided with the high-resolution measurements andmodel analyses from COPS. The extensive and varied data analyzed in this investigation show that convective available potential energy (CAPE) was present in this region (the distribution of CAPE and convective inhibition (CIN) is presented via an innovative, pseudo-3D visualization that allows horizontal and vertical interactions to be considered). However, convection was capped by a complex arrangement of dry layers; the base of the key layer was at 750 hPa. These dry layers descended separately from the upper troposphere, moving around the PV anomaly as it developed from a breaking Rossby wave to the west during the seven days before the IOP. This case adds to other studies that show that descent of complex dry layers is an important mechanism for forming convection-inhibiting atmospheric lids in Western Europe. A simple conceptual model is developed that synthesizes the effect of large-scale PV anomalies on deep convection from a series of consistent case studies. This model has significant implications for storm forecasting and projections of storminess in future climates, as it highlights the importance of thin structures that can advect hundreds of km before having an impact.
-------------------------------------

10011653_234 - 0.734098031949 - science
[leptin, crp, level, adiposity, measure, resistance, subject]

Epidemiological evidence against a role for C-reactive protein causing leptin resistance.
OBJECTIVE: It has been suggested that elevated levels of C-reactive protein (CRP) might interfere with leptin signalling and contribute to leptin resistance. Our aim was to assess whether plasma levels of CRP influence leptin resistance in humans; and our hypothesis was that CRP levels would modify the cross-sectional relationships between leptin and measures of adiposity. DESIGN AND METHODS: We assessed 4 measures of adiposity: body mass index, waist circumference, fat mass, and % body fat in 2113 British Regional Heart Study (BRHS) men (mean (SD) age 69 (5) years), with replication in 760 (age 69 (6) years) European Male Aging Study (EMAS) subjects. RESULTS: In BRHS subjects leptin correlated with CRP (Spearman's r=0.22, p<0.0001). Leptin and CRP correlated with all 4 measures of adiposity (r-value range: 0.22 to 0.57, all p<0.0001). Age-adjusted mean levels for adiposity measures increased in relation to leptin levels; but CRP level did not consistently influence the β coefficients of the regression lines in a CRP-stratified analysis. In BRHS subjects, the BMI vs. leptin relationship demonstrated a weak statistical interaction with CRP (p=0.04). We observed no similar interaction in EMAS subjects, and no significant interactions with other measures of adiposity in BRHS or EMAS cohorts. CONCLUSION: We have shown that plasma CRP has little influence on the relationship between measures of adiposity and serum leptin levels in these middle-aged and elderly male European cohorts. This study provides epidemiological evidence against CRP having a significant role in causing leptin resistance.
-------------------------------------

10010594_234 - 0.900930927155 - science
[ncrna, antibiotic, glutamine, synthetase, noncoding, cis-encoded, production]

Noncoding RNA of glutamine synthetase I modulates antibiotic production in Streptomyces coelicolor A3(2)
Overexpression of antisense chromosomal cis-encoded noncoding RNAss (ncRNAs) in glutamine synthetase I resulted in a decrease in growth, protein synthesis, and antibiotic production in Streptomyces coelicolor. In addition, we predicted 3,597 cis-encoded ncRNAs and validated 13 of them experimentally, including several ncRNAs that are differentially expressed in bacterial hormone-defective mutants. Copyright ?? 2010, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.
-------------------------------------

10010925_234 - 0.961982978965 - medicine
[patient, mll2, mutation]

How genetically heterogeneous is Kabuki syndrome?: MLL2 testing in 116 patients, review and analyses of mutation and phenotypic spectrum.
MLL2 mutations are detected in 55 to 80% of patients with Kabuki syndrome (KS). In 20 to 45% patients with KS, the genetic basis remains unknown, suggesting possible genetic heterogeneity. Here, we present the largest yet reported cohort of 116 patients with KS. We identified MLL2 variants in 74 patients, of which 47 are novel and a majority are truncating. We show that pathogenic missense mutations were commonly located in exon 48. We undertook a systematic facial KS morphology study of patients with KS at our regional dysmorphology meeting. Our data suggest that nearly all patients with typical KS facial features have pathogenic MLL2 mutations, although KS can be phenotypically variable. Furthermore, we show that MLL2 mutation-positive KS patients are more likely to have feeding problems, kidney anomalies, early breast bud development, joint dislocations and palatal malformations in comparison with MLL2 mutation-negative patients. Our work expands the mutation spectrum of MLL2 that may help in better understanding of this molecule, which is important in gene expression, epigenetic control of active chromatin states, embryonic development and cancer. Our analyses of the phenotype indicates that MLL2 mutation-positive and -negative patients differ systematically, and genetic heterogeneity of KS is not as extensive as previously suggested. Moreover, phenotypic variability of KS suggests that MLL2 testing should be considered even in atypical patients.
-------------------------------------

10013428_234 - 0.886979306511 - medicine
[patient, sf-36, survey, score, health, response, datum, item, dimension, reliability]

Use of the short form health survey (SF-36) in patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: tests of data quality, score reliability, response rate and scaling assumptions.
OBJECTIVES: To evaluate response rate, data quality, score reliability and scaling assumptions of the 36 item Short Form Health Survey (SF-36) in a large scale pan European survey of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) patients. DESIGN: A questionnaire based survey of patients diagnosed with ALS across 15 European countries. SAMPLE PATIENTS: presenting at neurological clinics for treatment of their condition were asked to partake in the survey. RESULTS: 948 patients have been recruited into the survey, from whom responses have been gained in 754 (79.5%). Scores on the eight dimensions of the SF-36 were found to manifest high internal consistency reliability. Items were, in most instances, found to be most highly correlated with their own (corrected) scale score than with other scale scores. However, on two dimensions (role-physical and role-emotional) there was high levels of missing data, together with substantial floor and ceiling effects. The two factor model (of underlying constructs of physical and emotional health) for the SF-36 suggested by the developers was not supported in this patient group. CONCLUSION The SF-36 appears to provide reliable information for this patient group, and for the most part there are high levels of item completeness and good spread of scores. This is not, however, true for the role functioning dimensions. Furthermore, the underlying two factor model for the SF-36 was not supported. The implications for measuring health status in this patient group are discussed.
-------------------------------------

10014387_234 - 0.841761413327 - science
[idi2, duplication, diphosphate, pattern, idi, isomerase]

Isopentenyl-diphosphate isomerases in human and mouse: Evolutionary analysis of a mammalian gene duplication
Isopentenyl diphosphate isomerase (IDI) activates isopentenyl diphosphate (IPP) for polymerization by converting it to its highly nucleophilic isomer dimethylallyl diphosphate (DMAPP). In plants, this central reaction of isoprenoid biosynthesis is catalyzed by various highly conserved isozymes that differ in expression pattern and subcellular localization. Here we report the identification of an IDI duplication in mammals. In contrast to the situation in plants, only one of the two isoforms (IDI1) is highly conserved, ubiquitously expressed and most likely responsible for housekeeping isomerase activity. The second isoform (IDI2) is much more divergent. We demonstrate that after the initial duplication IDI2 underwent a short phase of apparently random change, during which its active center became modified. Afterwards, IDI2 was exapted for a novel function and since then has been under strong purifying selection for at least 70 million years. Molecular modeling shows that the modified IDI2 is still likely to catalyze the isomerization of IPP to DMAPP. In humans, IDI2 is expressed at high levels only in skeletal muscle, where it may be involved in the specialized production of isoprenyl diphosphates for the posttranslational modification of proteins. The significant positive fitness effect of IDI2, revealed by the pattern of sequence conservation, as well as its specific expression pattern underscores the importance of the IDI gene duplication in mammals.
-------------------------------------

10008670_234 - 0.70262523316 - science
[times, measurement, vivo-like, effector, assay, condition, activity, enzymatic]

Why in vivo may not equal in vitro - new effectors revealed by measurement of enzymatic activities under the same in vivo-like assay conditions
Times Cited: 0
-------------------------------------

10017885_234 - 0.872065649804 - science
[cell, fascin, protrusion, actin, structure, role]

Fascins, and their roles in cell structure and function.
The fascins are a structurally unique and evolutionarily conserved group of actin cross-linking proteins. Fascins function in the organisation of two major forms of actin-based structures: dynamic, cortical cell protrusions and cytoplasmic microfilament bundles. The cortical structures, which include filopodia, spikes, lamellipodial ribs, oocyte microvilli and the dendrites of dendritic cells, have roles in cell-matrix adhesion, cell interactions and cell migration, whereas the cytoplasmic actin bundles appear to participate in cell architecture. We discuss the current understanding of the cellular mechanisms that regulate the binding of fascin to actin and how these processes contribute to the organisation or disassembly of cell protrusions. Although the in vivo roles of fascin have been studied principally in Drosophila, several human diseases are associated with inherited or acquired alterations in the expression of fascins. Strategies to modulate fascin-containing protrusions and thereby cell adhesive and migratory behaviour could have potential for therapeutic intervention in these conditions. The supplementary material referred to in this section can be found at http://www.interscience.wiley.com/jpages/0265-9247/suppmat/2002/v24.350.html
-------------------------------------

10004702_234 - 0.921391621727 - science
[plastid, erad, protein, cryptophyte, membrane, stramenopile, machinery, haptophyte, chromalveolate, selma]

ERAD components in organisms with complex red plastids suggest recruitment of a preexisting protein transport pathway for the periplastid membrane.
The plastids of cryptophytes, haptophytes, and heterokontophytes (stramenopiles) (together once known as chromists) are surrounded by four membranes, reflecting the origin of these plastids through secondary endosymbiosis. They share this trait with apicomplexans, which are alveolates, the plastids of which have been suggested to stem from the same secondary symbiotic event and therefore form a phylogenetic clade, the chromalveolates. The chromists are quantitatively the most important eukaryotic contributors to primary production in marine ecosystems. The mechanisms of protein import across their four plastid membranes are still poorly understood. Components of an endoplasmic reticulum-associated degradation (ERAD) machinery in cryptophytes, partially encoded by the reduced genome of the secondary symbiont (the nucleomorph), are implicated in protein transport across the second outermost plastid membrane. Here, we show that the haptophyte Emiliania huxleyi, like cryptophytes, stramenopiles, and apicomplexans, possesses a nuclear-encoded symbiont-specific ERAD machinery (SELMA, symbiont-specific ERAD-like machinery) in addition to the host ERAD system, with targeting signals that are able to direct green fluorescent protein or yellow fluorescent protein to the predicted cellular localization in transformed cells of the stramenopile Phaeodactylum tricornutum. Phylogenies of the duplicated ERAD factors reveal that all SELMA components trace back to a red algal origin. In contrast, the host copies of cryptophytes and haptophytes associate with the green lineage to the exclusion of stramenopiles and alveolates. Although all chromalveolates with four membrane-bound plastids possess the SELMA system, this has apparently not arisen in a single endosymbiotic event. Thus, our data do not support the chromalveolate hypothesis.
-------------------------------------

10005674_234 - 0.948487354381 - medicine
[sb-207266-a, bowel, patient, irritable, syndrome, rectal, receptor, sensitivity, 5-ht4, transit]

5-HT4 receptor antagonism in irritable bowel syndrome: effect of SB-207266-A on rectal sensitivity and small bowel transit.
BACKGROUND: Pre-clinical studies indicate that the 5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT)4 receptor may be involved in the pathophysiology of irritable bowel syndrome and that antagonism of this receptor may be an effective therapeutic strategy. AIM: To investigate the effects of SB-207266-A, a selective 5-HT4 receptor antagonist on rectal sensitivity and small bowel transit in patients with irritable bowel syndrome. METHODS: Eighteen patients with diarrhoea-predominant irritable bowel syndrome and a history of increased rectal sensitivity were randomized to receive either SB-207266-A (20 mg) or placebo for 10 days. Following a washout period, patients were then crossed over to receive the alternative therapy for 10 days. Rectal sensitivity and orocaecal transit time were assessed on day 10 of each treatment period. In addition, patients were asked whether they had experienced any changes in their symptoms. RESULTS: Fifteen patients completed the study. SB-207266-A significantly increased orocaecal transit time towards normal (placebo: 5.3 h (4.0-7.2 h), mean (IQR) vs. SB-207266-A: 6.5 h (4.8-8.0 h); P=0.027) and tended to decrease rectal sensitivity (volume to discomfort 89 mL (60-150 mL), geometric mean (IQR) vs. 107 mL (75-150 mL); P=0.134). Eleven out of 15 patients reported symptomatic improvements with SB-207266-A but none with placebo. SB-207266-A was well tolerated. CONCLUSION: Our results support a role for the 5-HT4 receptor in the pathophysiology of irritable bowel syndrome and suggest that the selective 5-HT4 antagonist, SB-207266-A, is worthy of further evaluation in this disorder.
-------------------------------------

10010960_234 - 0.831672535559 - science
[ssc, caveolin, tissue, cav1, fibrosis, restoration, expression, pathogenesis, function, fibroblast]

Decreased expression of caveolin 1 in patients with systemic sclerosis: crucial role in the pathogenesis of tissue fibrosis.
OBJECTIVE: Recent studies have implicated caveolin 1 in the regulation of transforming growth factor beta (TGFbeta) downstream signaling. Given the crucial role of TGFbeta in the pathogenesis of systemic sclerosis (SSc), we sought to determine whether caveolin 1 is also involved in the pathogenesis of tissue fibrosis in SSc. We analyzed the expression of CAV1 in affected SSc tissues, studied the effects of lack of expression of CAV1 in vitro and in vivo, and analyzed the effects of restoration of caveolin 1 function on the fibrotic phenotype of SSc fibroblasts in vitro. METHODS: CAV1 expression in tissues was analyzed by immunofluorescence and confocal microscopy. The extent of tissue fibrosis in Cav1-knockout mice was assessed by histologic/histochemical analyses and quantified by hydroxyproline assays. Cav1-null and SSc fibroblast phenotypes and protein production were analyzed by real-time polymerase chain reaction, immunofluorescence, Western blot, and multiplexed enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay techniques. The effects of restoration of caveolin 1 function in SSc fibroblasts in vitro were also examined using a cell-permeable recombinant CAV1 peptide. RESULTS: CAV1 was markedly decreased in the affected lungs and skin of SSc patients. Cav1-knockout mice developed pulmonary and skin fibrosis. Down-regulation of caveolin 1 was maintained in cultured SSc fibroblasts, and restoration of caveolin 1 function in vitro normalized their phenotype and abrogated TGFbeta stimulation through inhibition of Smad3 activation. CONCLUSION: Caveolin 1 appears to participate in the pathogenesis of tissue fibrosis in SSc. Restoration of caveolin 1 function by treatment with a cell-permeable peptide corresponding to the CAV1 scaffolding domain may be a novel therapeutic approach in SSc.
-------------------------------------

10009980_234 - 0.76836228376 - science
[antigen, serum, infected]

Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay of antigens from Candida albicans circulating in infected mice and rabbits: the role of mannan.
Various antisera raised either to antigens of Candida albicans or to sub-lethal infections of blastospores (convalescent sera) were tested for their efficacy in diagnosing systemic disease in artifically infected animals. Globulin from convalescent serum, when conjugated with alkaline phosphatase and used in enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (ELISA), was the only antiserum type which detected circulating Candida-related antigen in the serum of infected animals. Conjugates made from anti-mannan, anti-blastospore or antimycelial globulin did not detect antigen. Mannan did not appear to be related to an antigen produced in sera of experimentally infected mice. The significance of these results in the diagnosis of systemic candidosis is discussed.
-------------------------------------

10010588_234 - 0.753197428601 - science
[pathway, design, tool, synthetic]

Computational tools for the synthetic design of biochemical pathways
As the field of synthetic biology is developing, the prospects for de novo design of biosynthetic pathways are becoming more and more realistic. Hence, there is an increasing need for computational tools that can support these efforts. A range of algorithms has been developed that can be used to identify all possible metabolic pathways and their corresponding enzymatic parts. These can then be ranked according to various properties and modelled in an organism-specific context. Finally, design software can aid the biologist in the integration of a selected pathway into smartly regulated transcriptional units. Here, we review key existing tools and offer suggestions for how informatics can help to shape the future of synthetic microbiology. ?? 2012 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved.
-------------------------------------

10008664_234 - 0.879798359226 - medicine
[patient, nsclc, combination, advanced, erlotinib]

Erlotinib in combination with pemetrexed for patients with advanced non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC): a phase I dose-finding study.
BACKGROUND: Erlotinib and pemetrexed are approved single agents for second-line treatment of non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) and, in combination, have shown synergistic antitumor activity in NSCLC cell lines. We investigated the safety, pharmacokinetics and preliminary efficacy of combined erlotinib-pemetrexed in patients with refractory advanced NSCLC. PATIENTS AND METHODS: A nonrandomized, open-label, phase IB study was performed in patients with advanced NSCLC whose disease had progressed on or following first-line chemotherapy with a platinum-containing regimen or for whom the erlotinib-pemetrexed combination was considered appropriate. Patients received i.v. pemetrexed 500-700 mg/m² every 3 weeks and oral erlotinib 100-150 mg/day. RESULTS: Twenty patients were recruited. The most common adverse events (AEs) were rash, diarrhea and fatigue. Serious AEs occurred in eight patients (three treatment related) and there were eight deaths (none treatment related). Dose-limiting toxic effects were not experienced up to erlotinib 150 mg/day plus pemetrexed 600 mg/m². Concurrent administration did not affect pharmacokinetic parameters. Two patients achieved partial responses and nine had stable disease. CONCLUSIONS: Erlotinib-pemetrexed combination is well tolerated at doses equal to the licensed single-agent doses (150 mg/day and 500 mg/m², respectively). The good tolerability profile and promising efficacy indicate that this combination warrants further investigation for patients with advanced NSCLC.
-------------------------------------

10008672_234 - 0.842088578582 - medicine
[patient, zibotentan, chinese, safety, study, pk]

Single- and multiple-dose pharmacokinetics, safety and tolerability of zibotentan (ZD4054) in Chinese men with advanced solid tumors.
PURPOSE: The endothelin axis and the endothelin A (ET(A)) receptor have been implicated in tumor development and bone metastasis. This study aimed to investigate the pharmacokinetic (PK) and safety profiles of the specific ET(A) receptor antagonist, zibotentan, in elderly, male Chinese patients with advanced solid tumors. The PK data generated in these Chinese patients were further compared with those previously reported in Japanese and Caucasian patient populations. METHODS: In this Phase I, open-label study, patients received a single dose of zibotentan 10 mg on Day 1, followed by a 72-h washout period and 12 consecutive days of once-daily zibotentan 10 mg. RESULTS: Fifteen patients received at least one dose of zibotentan 10 mg. Exposure was demonstrated in all patients and the PK profiles following single dosing and multiple dosing showed relatively rapid absorption, decline in a monophasic manner, a modest amount of accumulation, and relatively low apparent clearance and volume of distribution. Zibotentan was well tolerated with no new safety concerns. Adverse events reported in >1 patient were pyrexia (n = 4), constipation (n = 3), headache (n = 3) and peripheral edema (n = 2). Comparative analysis found no evidence of significant differences in zibotentan exposure between the Chinese patients in our study, and the previous Japanese and Caucasian studies. CONCLUSIONS: The PK and safety profiles of zibotentan determined in this Chinese patient population are similar to those previously reported. Our findings suggest no clinically relevant inter-ethnic differences in zibotentan disposition between the patient populations analyzed.
-------------------------------------

10001990_234 - 0.745309056169 - medicine
[pain, crp, participant, knee, obesity]

Obesity is a risk factor for musculoskeletal pain in adolescents: Findings from a population-based cohort.
Obesity is a risk factor for fibromyalgia in adults, but whether a similar relationship exists in children is uncertain. This study examined whether obesity is associated with reporting of musculoskeletal pain, including chronic regional pain (CRP) and chronic widespread pain (CWP), in adolescents, in a population-based setting. A pain questionnaire was administered to offspring of the Avon Longitudinal Study of Parents and Children at age 17, asking about site, duration, and pain intensity, from which participants with different types of musculoskeletal pain were identified. Relationships between obesity and pain were examined by calculating odds ratios stratified by gender and adjusted for socioeconomic status as reflected by level of maternal education. A total of 3376 participants (1424 boys) with complete data were identified, mean age 17.8; 44.7% of participants reported any pain within the last month lasting 1day or longer; 16.3% reported lower back pain, 9.6% shoulder pain, 9.4% upper back pain, 8.9% neck pain, 8.7% knee pain, 6.8% ankle/foot pain, 4.7% CRP, and 4.3% CWP; 7.0% of participants were obese. Obesity was associated with increased odds of any pain (odds ratio OR 1.33, P=.04), CRP (OR 2.04, P=.005), and knee pain (OR 1.87, P=.001), but not CWP (OR 1.10, P=.5). Compared with non obese participants, those with any pain, knee pain, and CRP reported more severe average pain (P<.01). Obese adolescents were more likely to report musculoskeletal pain, including knee pain and CRP. Moreover, obese adolescents with knee pain and CRP had relatively high pain scores, suggesting a more severe phenotype with worse prognosis.
-------------------------------------

10009689_234 - 0.76835615473 - science
[survival, tumour, plexus, choroid, year, cpc, last, datum, radiotherapy, carcinoma]

Outcomes of choroid plexus tumours diagnosed in the North West region of the UK during 1954-2008
Background: Choroid plexus tumours (CPTs); namely choroid plexus papilloma (CPP) and choroid plexus carcinoma (CPC) are rare neoplasms of the central nervous system (CNS), accounting for 0.4-0.6% of all brain tumours and 1-4% of childhood brain tumours.  This study was undertaken to provide further insight into the epidemiology, natural history and outcomes in relation to changes in treatment emphasis for these rare tumours, over the last 56 years in the NW of England and determine the relative importance of possible contributory factors.Methods: Data relating to presentation, management and survival for 57 patients diagnosed with CPT between 1954-2008 was extracted from the North West Children’s Tumour Registry and hospital records.Results: Data collated showed a male predilection for choroid plexus carcinomas (22 male, 6 female) and an equal distribution of CPP and CPC (29 and 28 respectively). 5 year Kaplan-Meier estimates demonstrate significant improvements in survival for papillomas over the last 56 years with extent of resection being the most important factor in survival (p=0.001). Carcinomas show no significant improvement in survival over the last 56 years with 5 year survival fluctuating by 10% over the last 40 years.  However, overall survival is improved by adjuvant treatment with both chemotherapy and radiotherapy (p<0.05) with a non-significant trend for extent of resection leading to an improval in survival (p=0.08).  Radiotherapy remained the only significant factor in multivariable analysis (Cox p=0.031).Conclusion: Our study shows that CPC is more commonly diagnosed in males and that CPP and CPC arise in equal proportions.  OS for CPC has improved with the use of radiotherapy and chemotherapy. To the authors’ knowledge, this report characterises and provides survival data for choroid plexus tumours over a longer period of time than any other large single-institution series currently available.
-------------------------------------

10008601_234 - 0.91513759889 - science
[psoriasis, keratinocyte, laminin, membrane, expression, basement]

Concepts in psoriasis: psoriasis and the extracellular matrix.
Post-streptococcal guttate psoriasis only sometimes progresses to the persistent plaque psoriasis. We have previously proposed that psoriasis is driven by multiple extradomain A+ fibronectin (EDA+ FN) 'feedback loops'. The psoriasis-specific loop, the 'keratinocyte loop', depends upon expression by keratinocytes of α5β1 integrin. In normal skin, α5β1 expression is minimal or absent in resting epithelial cells, where basal cells are anchored to the laminin component of the basement membrane (via integrins α6β4 and α3β1). However, when the laminin layer is disrupted, due to wounding for instance, α5β1 is then strongly expressed by basal cells as a means for anchoring. At uninvolved skin sites in patients with psoriasis the laminin layer within the basement membrane is disrupted, with a consequential increase in the expression by basal keratinocytes of EDA+ FN and α5β1. We are postulating that in guttate psoriasis streptococcal lytic enzymes, and in particular streptokinase, may - via plasminogen activation - initiate a disruption of the laminin layer in the basement membrane. It is also possible that the expression by proliferating keratinocytes of plasminogen-activating factor might result in additional laminin digestion. The suggestion is that progression of guttate psoriasis to full-blown plaque psoriasis, or to its spontaneous resolution, is governed largely by the triggering of humoral immune responses. Thus, if streptococcal lytic enzymes are neutralized by host antibodies in advance of irreversible and lasting damage to the basement membrane of the dermal papillae, then guttate psoriasis will resolve spontaneously. In contrast, if permanent damage is induced prior to effective neutralization of the relevant bacterial toxins, then keratinocytes will become chronically destabilized. The consequence will be to liberate keratinocytes to proliferate in response to various stimuli, and to continue to elaborate plasminogen activation enzymes; the combined effect being, in concert with immunological priming, to precipitate and sustain plaque psoriasis.
-------------------------------------

10009839_234 - 0.926915439917 - science
[phagocytosis, non-opsonic, arthroconidium, neutrophil, mentagrophyte, level]

Non-opsonic phagocytosis of Trichophyton mentagrophytes arthroconidia by human neutrophils in vitro.
A non-opsonic mechanism of binding and phagocytosis by human neutrophils of Trichophyton mentagrophytes arthroconidia is described. This was in direct contrast to the complement dependency of Candida albicans phagocytosis. Both serum complement and specific antibody to T. mentagrophytes promoted maximal phagocytosis (61% and 40% of neutrophils, respectively, contained arthroconidia). Increasing the ratio of arthroconidia to neutrophils did not increase non-opsonic phagocytosis (18-26%). Phagocytosis of arthroconidia exposed to trypsin in the absence of opsonin was not affected (18%). However, proteinase and chitinase reduced the level of non-opsonic and opsonic phagocytosis to negligible levels (6.3% and 4.5%, respectively). When mannose was added to neutrophils, mannose receptors on the phagocyte membrane were partially blocked when arthroconidia were opsonised, but this did not reduce the level of non-opsonic phagocytosis. The non-opsonic mechanism proposed here may have direct relevance in skin sites poor in opsonins.
-------------------------------------

10016997_234 - 0.747301047502 - society
[identity, national, christian, ethnic, british]

Ethnic nominalism and civic religiosity: Christianity and national identity in Britain
The relationship between religion and national identity is a contested topic in public debates about cultural diversity and immigration. In sample surveys only a minority the British population identify themselves as belonging to a Christian religion, and far fewer practise their faith. Nevertheless, nearly a quarter of the population think it is important to be Christian to be truly British. This study explores the complex relationships between religious and national identities in Britain, using data from the 2008 British Social Attitudes Survey. Three different forms of national identity were identified through factor analysis: civic-symbolic, cultural-aesthetic and ethnic national identity. Ethnic national identity is the only dimension of national identity that is positively associated with thinking it is important to be Christian to be British. While churchgoing Christians are more likely to feel national in response to secular cultural symbols, they are less likely to associate religion with nationality than those with a nominal Christian affiliation. The results indicate that Christianity has cultural significance for national identity primarily as a proxy for ethnic identity.
-------------------------------------

10005648_234 - 0.785144340252 - medicine
[infection, irritable, syndrome, bowel, chlamydial, patient, trachomati, symptom, result]

Chlamydia trachomatis infection: is it relevant in irritable bowel syndrome?
BACKGROUND: Irritable bowel syndrome can present with gynaecological symptoms similar to those of chronic pelvic inflammatory disease, which is commonly caused by Chlamydia trachomatis. Infection with this organism might therefore lead to diagnostic and management difficulties in patients, not only as a result of symptom overlap between the two disorders but also because chlamydial infection might exacerbate the symptoms of irritable bowel syndrome. This study was designed to investigate any possible link between chlamydial infection and irritable bowel syndrome. PATIENTS/METHODS: The prevalence of antibodies to C. trachomatis and abdominal symptomatology was assessed in a group of 100 female patients with irritable bowel syndrome and 100 matched female controls. RESULTS: 25% of patients and 17% of controls were found to have evidence of previous chlamydial infection. This difference was not statistically significant. Within the patient group, no association was found between chlamydial infection and any particular pattern of symptomatology. CONCLUSIONS: The results of this study indicate that occult chlamydial infection is not a major problem in irritable bowel syndrome and that routine investigation for this organism is unnecessary. They also provide some reassurance that pelvic inflammatory disease and all its potentially serious consequences is not being significantly overlooked in gastroenterological practice.
-------------------------------------

10005605_234 - 0.947242048346 - medicine
[azathioprine, crohn, disease, patient, totali, hair, drug, alopecia, treatment]

Alopecia totalis in a patient with Crohn's disease and its treatment with azathioprine.
A patient with Crohn's disease and alopecia totalis is described. Despite relative inactivity of the Crohn's disease, treatment with azathioprine was commenced. This led to complete regrowth of hair which was lost when the drug was discontinued. Re-institution of azathioprine restored hair to normal again and the patient has since declined to try stopping the drug despite the knowledge of potential side effects.
-------------------------------------

10018329_234 - 0.88760579334 - science
[eosinophilia, mouse, lung, cell, cd8]

Host genetic determinants of vaccine-induced eosinophilia during respiratory syncytial virus infection.
In BALB/c mice, sensitization with the attachment protein (G) of respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) leads to CD4+ T cell-mediated lung eosinophilia during subsequent challenge with RSV. To determine the host genetic influences on this model of lung eosinophilia, we tested 15 different inbred mouse strains. Eosinophilia developed in all H-2d (BALB/c, DBA/2n, and B10.D2), but not in H-2k (CBA/Ca, CBA/J, C3H, BALB.K, or B10.BR) mouse strains. Among H-2b mice, 129 and BALB.B developed eosinophilia, whereas C57BL/6 and C57BL/10 did not. Testing first generation crosses between sensitive and resistant strains showed that eosinophilia developed in all H-2dxk (n = 5), irrespective of background genes, but not in H-2dxb (n = 2) mice. In vivo depletion of CD8+ T cells or IFN-gamma rendered C57BL/6, but not BALB.K mice, susceptible to eosinophilia. Analysis of B10 recombinant mice showed that the Dd allele (in B10.A(5R) mice) prevented CD8+ T cell accumulation in the lung, resulting in intense lung eosinophilia. However, the Db allele (in B10.A(2R) and B10.A(4R) mice) supported CD8+ T cell expansion and prevented eosinophilia. Intracellular cytokine staining showed that lung eosinophilia correlated with reduced IFN-gamma and increased IL-10 expression in lung T cells. These results are compatible with the unifying model that Th2 cells mediate the disease but can be inhibited by CD8+ T cells secreting IFN-gamma. Our findings have important implications for the development of protective, nonpathogenic vaccines for RSV disease.
-------------------------------------

10002040_234 - 0.703955797537 - medicine
[posaconazole, drug, therapeutic, monitoring, invasive]

Posaconazole: the case for therapeutic drug monitoring.
Invasive fungal infections are associated with high morbidity and mortality. Antifungal therapeutic options remain relatively limited; therefore, optimization of present regimens is essential. Posaconazole is licensed for prevention of invasive fungal infections and oropharyngeal candidiasis and salvage therapy for invasive aspergillosis. Recent data suggest that therapeutic drug monitoring may be an important tool for patient management. Clinical and laboratory animal data suggest that posaconazole demonstrates clinically relevant exposure-response relationships. Higher systemic drug exposure is associated with improved clinical outcomes. Potentially subtherapeutic concentrations are frequently encountered in critically ill patients. Therapeutic drug monitoring provides a way to optimize the use of posaconazole, and this review summarizes the indications and process by which this can be achieved.
-------------------------------------

10007499_234 - 0.967880453864 - medicine
[nsclc, antivascular, patient, treatment, therapy, agent]

Antivascular agents for non-small-cell lung cancer: current status and future directions.
BACKGROUND: Despite improvements in surgery and chemo(radio)therapy which have allowed for modest advances in the treatment of patients with non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC), survival remains poor and further improvements are needed. Attention over recent years has focused, therefore, on targeted therapies, with notable success in the development of antivascular drugs. OBJECTIVE: To summarize the current knowledge on antivascular therapy in patients with NSCLC. METHOD: Review of randomized controlled trials exploring treatment of NSCLC patients with antivascular drugs. RESULTS/CONCLUSION: Bevacizumab, a humanized monoclonal antibody against the vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), when added to cytotoxic chemotherapy, was the first treatment to prolong the overall survival of patients with advanced NSCLC beyond 12 months, a significant breakthrough in the management of advanced NSCLC. Small-molecule tyrosine kinase inhibitors and alternative antivascular strategies such as VEGF-trap and vascular disrupting agents are also being investigated and have shown promise in clinical trials. This review summarizes the most recent and important findings in antivascular agents in NSCLC.
-------------------------------------

10003465_234 - 0.901287610761 - science
[gliotransmission, signalling, astrocyte, brain, exocytotic, astrocytic, secretory]

Astroglial excitability and gliotransmission: an appraisal of Ca2+ as a signalling route.
Astroglial cells, due to their passive electrical properties, were long considered subservient to neurons and to merely provide the framework and metabolic support of the brain. Although astrocytes do play such structural and housekeeping roles in the brain, these glial cells also contribute to the brain's computational power and behavioural output. These more active functions are endowed by the Ca(2+)-based excitability displayed by astrocytes. An increase in cytosolic Ca(2+) levels in astrocytes can lead to the release of signalling molecules, a process termed gliotransmission, via the process of regulated exocytosis. Dynamic components of astrocytic exocytosis include the vesicular-plasma membrane secretory machinery, as well as the vesicular traffic, which is governed not only by general cytoskeletal elements but also by astrocyte-specific IFs (intermediate filaments). Gliotransmitters released into the ECS (extracellular space) can exert their actions on neighbouring neurons, to modulate synaptic transmission and plasticity, and to affect behaviour by modulating the sleep homoeostat. Besides these novel physiological roles, astrocytic Ca(2+) dynamics, Ca(2+)-dependent gliotransmission and astrocyte-neuron signalling have been also implicated in brain disorders, such as epilepsy. The aim of this review is to highlight the newer findings concerning Ca(2+) signalling in astrocytes and exocytotic gliotransmission. For this we report on Ca(2+) sources and sinks that are necessary and sufficient for regulating the exocytotic release of gliotransmitters and discuss secretory machinery, secretory vesicles and vesicle mobility regulation. Finally, we consider the exocytotic gliotransmission in the modulation of synaptic transmission and plasticity, as well as the astrocytic contribution to sleep behaviour and epilepsy.
-------------------------------------

10017019_234 - 0.77183986303 - medicine
[inhibitor, dementia, clinical, cholinesterase, evidence, cognitive, effective, drug, disease, memantine]

Clinical practice with anti-dementia drugs: a revised (second) consensus statement from the British Association for Psychopharmacology.
The British Association for Psychopharmacology (BAP) coordinated a meeting of experts to review and revise its first (2006) Guidelines for clinical practice with anti-dementia drugs. As before, levels of evidence were rated using accepted standards which were then translated into grades of recommendation A to D, with A having the strongest evidence base (from randomized controlled trials) and D the weakest (case studies or expert opinion). Current clinical diagnostic criteria for dementia have sufficient accuracy to be applied in clinical practice (B) and brain imaging can improve diagnostic accuracy (B). Cholinesterase inhibitors (donepezil, rivastigmine, and galantamine) are effective for mild to moderate Alzheimer's disease (A) and memantine for moderate to severe Alzheimer's disease (A). Until further evidence is available other drugs, including statins, anti-inflammatory drugs, vitamin E and Ginkgo biloba, cannot be recommended either for the treatment or prevention of Alzheimer's disease (A). Neither cholinesterase inhibitors nor memantine are effective in those with mild cognitive impairment (A). Cholinesterase inhibitors are not effective in frontotemporal dementia and may cause agitation (A), though selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors may help behavioural (but not cognitive) features (B). Cholinesterase inhibitors should be used for the treatment of people with Lewy body dementias (Parkinson's disease dementia and dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB)), especially for neuropsychiatric symptoms (A). Cholinesterase inhibitors and memantine can produce cognitive improvements in DLB (A). There is no clear evidence that any intervention can prevent or delay the onset of dementia. Although the consensus statement focuses on medication, psychological interventions can be effective in addition to pharmacotherapy, both for cognitive and non-cognitive symptoms. Many novel pharmacological approaches involving strategies to reduce amyloid and/or tau deposition are in progress. Although results of pivotal studies are awaited, results to date have been equivocal and no disease-modifying agents are either licensed or can be currently recommended for clinical use.
-------------------------------------

10010345_234 - 0.749784021322 - science
[mutagenesis, rational, random, engineering]

The future of industrial antibiotic production: from random mutagenesis to synthetic biology.
Natural products derived from the secondary metabolism of microbes constitute a cornerstone of modern medicine. Engineering bugs to produce these products in high quantities is a major challenge for biotechnology, which has usually been tackled by either one of two strategies: iterative random mutagenesis or rational design. Recently, we analyzed the transcriptome of a Streptomyces clavuligerus strain optimized for production of the ??-lactamase inhibitor clavulanic acid by multiple rounds of mutagenesis and selection, and discovered that the observed changes matched surprisingly well with simple changes that have been introduced into these strains by rational engineering. Here, we discuss how in the new field of synthetic biology, random mutagenesis and rational engineering can be implemented complementarily in ways which may enable one to go beyond the status quo that has now been reached by each method independently.
-------------------------------------

10010302_234 - 0.876744617613 - science
[antibiotic, metabolite, signalling, biosynthesis, time, mutant, scba, ??, molecule, scb]

Deletion of the signalling molecule synthase ScbA has pleiotropic effects on secondary metabolite biosynthesis, morphological differentiation and primary metabolism in Streptomyces coelicolor A3(2)
Streptomycetes have high biotechnological relevance as producers of diverse metabolites widely used in medical and agricultural applications. The biosynthesis of these metabolites is controlled by signalling molecules, ??-butyrolactones, that act as bacterial hormones. In Streptomyces coelicolor, a group of signalling molecules called SCBs (S. coelicolorbutanolides) regulates production of the pigmented antibiotics coelicolor polyketide (CPK), actinorhodin and undecylprodigiosin. The ??-butyrolactone synthase ScbA is responsible for the biosynthesis of SCBs. Here we show the results of a genome-wide transcriptome analysis of a scbA deletion mutant prior to and during the transition to antibiotic production. We report a strong perturbation in the expression of three pigmented antibiotic clusters in the mutant throughout the growth curve, thus providing a molecular explanation for the antibiotic phenotype observed previously. Our study also revealed, for the first time, that the secondary metabolite cluster responsible for synthesis of the siderophore desferrioxamine is under the control of SCB signalling. Moreover, expression of the genes encoding enzymes for primary metabolism pathways, which supply antibiotic precursors and genes for morphological differentiation, was found shifted earlier in time in the mutant. In conclusion, our time series analysis demonstrates new details of the regulatory effects of the ??-butyrolactone system in Streptomyces. ?? 2010 The Authors. Journal compilation ?? 2010 Society for Applied Microbiology and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
-------------------------------------

10003286_234 - 0.881475098535 - science
[galanin, hf, hair, human, growth]

The neuropeptide galanin is a novel inhibitor of human hair growth.
BACKGROUND: Galanin is a trophic factor of the central and peripheral nervous system that shows widespread distribution in human skin. However, the exact localization and the role of galanin in the hair follicle (HF) remain to be clarified. OBJECTIVES: To characterize galanin expression in human scalp HFs and to examine the effects of galanin on normal human scalp HF growth in organ culture. METHODS: Immunohistochemistry was performed on cryosections of human female scalp skin. Anagen HFs were microdissected and cultured up to 9 days and treated with 100 nmol L(-1) galanin. Staining for Ki-67, TUNEL and Masson-Fontana were used to analyse proliferation, apoptosis and hair cycle staging of the HFs. Functional effects of galanin were tested in serum-free HF organ culture. RESULTS: Galanin-like immunoreactivity was detected in the outer root sheath (ORS) and inner root sheath. Additionally, galanin mRNA was detected in ORS keratinocytes and all HF samples tested. Galanin receptor transcripts (GalR2, GalR3) were also detected in selected samples. Galanin reduced proliferation of hair matrix keratinocytes in situ compared with vehicle-treated controls, shortened the hair growth phase (anagen) in vitro and reduced hair shaft elongation. This was accompanied by the premature development of a catagen-like morphology of galanin-treated HFs. CONCLUSIONS: We present the first evidence that human HFs are both a source and a functionally relevant target of galanin. Due to its hair growth-inhibitory properties in vitro, galanin application deserves further exploration as a potential new treatment strategy for unwanted hair growth (hirsutism, hypertrichosis).
-------------------------------------

10003571_234 - 0.93081077286 - science
[sf1293, type, prokaryote, glutamine, synthetase, bialapho]

Purification and properties of a prokaryote type glutamine synthetase from the bialaphos producer Streptomyces hygroscopicus SF1293
A prokaryote type glutamine synthetase (GS) was purified from a bialaphos (BA)-producing organism, Streptomyces hygroscopicus SF1293 (SF1293). The GS (GS I) consisted of a 55,000 dalton subunit, and its N-terminal amino acid sequence was similar to that of S. coelicolor GS. GS I was highly sensitive to GS inhibitor phosphinothricin (PPT). An increase of GS activity was observed accompanied by BA accumulation.
-------------------------------------

10011827_234 - 0.894229284674 - medicine
[patient, rituximab-refractory, median, month, ofatumumab, fl, lymphoma, study, follicular]

Ofatumumab monotherapy in rituximab-refractory follicular lymphoma: results from a multicenter study.
New treatments are required for rituximab-refractory follicular lymphoma (FL). In the present study, patients with rituximab-refractory FL received 8 weekly infusions of ofatumumab (CD20 mAb; dose 1, 300 mg and doses 2-8, 500 or 1000 mg; N = 116). The median age of these patients was 61 years, 47% had high-risk Follicular Lymphoma International Prognostic Index scores, 65% were chemotherapy-refractory, and the median number of prior therapies was 4. The overall response rate was 13% and 10% for the 500-mg and 1000-mg arms, respectively. Among 27 patients refractory to rituximab monotherapy, the overall response rate was 22%. The median progression-free survival was 5.8 months. Forty-six percent of patients demonstrated tumor reduction 3 months after therapy initiation, and the median progression-free survival for these patients was 9.1 months. The most common adverse events included infections, rash, urticaria, fatigue, and pruritus. Three patients experienced grade 3 infusion-related reactions, none of which were considered serious events. Grade 3-4 neutropenia, leukopenia, anemia, and thrombocytopenia occurred in a subset of patients. Ofatumumab was well tolerated and modestly active in this heavily pretreated, rituximab-refractory population and is therefore now being studied in less refractory FL and in combination with other agents in various B-cell neoplasms. The present study was registered at www.clinicaltrials.gov as NCT00394836.
-------------------------------------

10011505_234 - 0.919338399486 - medicine
[cough, patient, symptom]

The experience of cough in patients diagnosed with lung cancer
Purpose The aim of this study was to explore the patientexperience of cough in a population of patients with lungcancer.Methods A qualitative exploratory study design was developedand elicited the views of 26 patients with lung cancerwho had current or past experience with cough.Results The data's four themes highlight the complex anddistressing nature of cough, including its interaction withother symptoms, such as breathlessness, fatigue and sleepdisturbance. A theme around descriptions of cough suggeststypically a dry tickly cough and highlights mechanicaland environmental triggers for cough. The theme aroundthe effects of cough in daily life shows the impact of coughin socialising, the embarrassment from cough and thepsychological effects experienced by patients. The lasttheme focuses on strategies for coping with and managingcough, showing the perceived ineffectiveness of currentantitussives and the patients' use of a variety of approacheson an ad hoc basis to try to manage their cough oftenunsuccessfully.Conclusion Cough has not received the same attention asother cancer symptoms, which means that patients' experienceof a distressing and difficult symptom is oftenunnoticed by health care professionals. More clinical andresearch attention in this debilitating symptom is necessary.
-------------------------------------

10017160_234 - 0.819538759841 - science
[formaldehyde, pathway, transcription, factor, frmr, structure, protein]

Molecular Basis of Bacterial Formaldehyde Sensing
Formaldehyde is a highly toxic molecule; despite this, it is produced in the cells of all living organisms as a by-product of metabolic pathways. Consequently, several pathways have evolved throughout life in order to detoxify cellular formaldehyde. These pathways need to be regulated within the cell and this study sets out to determine how these pathways are regulated in particular bacteria. Several approaches are taken to achieve this. Known or predicted transcription factors that regulate formaldehyde detoxification pathways from particular organisms are considered. These proteins are called FrmR (E. coli), HxlR1 (Bacillus subtilis), and HxlR2 (Bacillus Cereus). The transcription factors are cloned and purified using molecular biology techniques. The proteins are subject to biophysical characterisation i.e. size and secondary structure composition. Additionally, the X-ray crystal structure of HxlR2 is determined and significant progress is made towards determining the structure of FrmR. Interactions of these transcription factors towards their target DNA sequences are studied along with the effect that formaldehyde has on these interactions. A reporter system is constructed that enables the behaviour of FrmR to be studied in vivo. Residues that are likely to play important roles in DNA recognition by this regulator are identified. Additionally, this reporter system identifies a residue that is essential for formaldehyde sensing by this protein. Overall, some significant insights into how these transcription factors carry out their biological function are established.
-------------------------------------

10005496_234 - 0.856163644083 - science
[measurement, reactivity, effect, study]

Reactivity of measurement in health psychology: how much of a problem is it? What can be done about it?
PURPOSE: Measurement reactivity is defined as being present where measurement results in changes in the people being measured. The main aim of this review is to provide an overview of the current state of knowledge concerning the extent and nature of psychological measurement affecting people who complete the measures. Other aims are to describe how this may affect conclusions drawn in health psychology research and to outline where more research is needed. METHODS: Narrative review. RESULTS: Several studies, using a variety of methods, have found measurement procedures to alter subsequent cognition, emotion, and behaviour. In many instances, the effects obtained were of up to medium size. However, the extent to which such studies are representative is not clear: do other studies which find no reactive effects of measurement not exist or do they exist but are not reported? CONCLUSIONS: Although measurement reactivity can yield medium-sized effects, our understanding of this phenomenon is still rudimentary. We do not know the precise circumstances that are likely to result in measurement reactivity: we cannot predict when problems are more likely to arise. There is a particular absence of studies of the mechanisms by which measurement reactivity arises. There is a need for a systematic review of this literature, which should aim to quantify the extent of measurement reactivity effects and to provide a firmer evidence base for theorizing about the sources of reactivity.
-------------------------------------

10016419_234 - 0.866541892679 - science
[gene, hsd17b1, species, human]

Interspecies comparison of gene structure and computational analysis of gene regulation of 17beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 1
{17beta-Hydroxysteroid} dehydrogenase type 1 {(HSD17B1)} is a key enzyme of 17beta-estradiol biosynthesis, and in rodents is additionally involved in testosterone biosynthesis. The human {HSD17B1} gene, located on chromosome 17q12-21, is duplicated in tandem, with the 3???-copy being the functional gene. Here we show by sequencing the gene from a diverse set of related species that this duplication is of very recent evolutionary origin, having occurred in the common ancestor of Hominoidae (apes and humans) while being absent in the closely related Old World monkeys {(Macaca)} and the outgroup species Tupaia belangeri and Mus musculus. By computational analysis of the conserved regulatory elements in the 5???-untranslated {(5???-UTR)} and putative promoter region of the {HSD17B1} gene and, where present, pseudogene, across our broad sample of species we can show significant differences that might point to the origin of the divergent substrate specificity of human and rodent {HSD17B1} and highlight potential functionally relevant differences in regulatory patterns in different evolutionary lineages. ?? 2005 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.
-------------------------------------

10017047_234 - 0.80101776269 - medicine
[dementia, treatment, pharmaceutical, guideline, effect, symptom, psychosocial, medication, biological, different]

World Federation of Societies of Biological Psychiatry (WFSBP) guidelines for the biological treatment of Alzheimer's disease and other dementias.
OBJECTIVES: To define a practice guideline for biological treatment of dementia and to make transparent the development of the guideline connecting the original data with the resulting recommendations. METHODS: This guideline includes pharmacologic treatment considerations for patients with Alzheimer's disease, vascular dementia, DLB, and fronto-temporal dementia. Studies were selected that represent double-blind placebo-controlled trials of at least 3 months duration in patients with a diagnosis of dementia according to accepted international diagnostic criteria (for example the NINCDS/ADRDA or NINDS/AIREN criteria). Moreover, to be included studies had to fulfill a restrictive set of methodological criteria. Original studies and not meta-analyses determined the evaluation and the development of recommendations. RESULTS: Antidementia pharmaceuticals neither cure nor arrest the disease. A modest effect of improvement of symptoms compared with placebo can be observed. Antidementia pharmaceuticals show different efficacy and side effect profiles. The type of dementia, the individual symptom constellation and the tolerability should determine what medication should be used. There are hints that combination therapy of drugs with different therapeutic mechanisms might improve the efficacy. In treating neuropsychiatric symptoms (NPS), psychosocial intervention should be the treatment of first choice. Pharmaceuticals can only be recommended when psychosocial interventions is not adequate. However, even then the side effects of pharmaceuticals limit their use. CONCLUSIONS: Depending on the diagnostic entity and the pathology treated different anti-dementia drugs can be recommended to improve symptoms. In the management of NPS, side effects limit the use of medications even when psychosocial interventions have failed. Thus, there is an urgent need to develop more efficacious medications for the treatment of dementia.
-------------------------------------

10008492_234 - 0.732624595518 - science
[adenoma, igf-ii, colorectal, serum, individual, igfbp-2, factor]

Circulating insulin-like growth factor II and colorectal adenomas
Circulating insulin-like growth factor I (IGF-I) and IGF-binding protein-3 (IGFBP-3) may be risk factors for the development of colorectal cancer. On the other hand, IGF-II and IGFBP-2 are overexpressed in colorectal carcinomas. These contrasting backgrounds led us to investigate the relationship between serum IGF-I, IGF-II, IGFBP-2, and IGFBP-3 and the presence of colorectal adenomas, known precursors of colorectal carcinoma, in 345 volunteers attending a screening flexible sigmoidoscopy trial (entry criteria: healthy, aged 55-64 yr). The most striking finding was an elevated mean serum IGF-II in individuals with adenomas (n = 52) compared with controls (mean difference, 139 ng/mL; 95% confidence intervals, 82, 196; P &lt; 0.0001). Logistic regression adjusting for confounding factors confirmed the significant association between IGF-II and adenoma occurrence (P &lt; 0.0001) and revealed an additional positive association with serum IGFBP-2 (P &lt; 0.0001). However, there was no association found between either serum IGF-I and/or IGFBP-3 and the presence of adenomas. Additionally, in 31 individuals with adenomas in whom levels were determined pre- and postpolypectomy, there was a significant fall in mean IGF-II (P &lt; 0.001) and IGFBP-2 (P &lt; 0.001) after adenoma removal, but no difference in IGF-II and IGFBP-2 concentrations between repeated samples in 20 individuals without adenomas. Immunohistochemical studies demonstrated IGF-II expression in 83% of all adenomas, which contrasted with absent expression in normal colonic expression and hyperplastic polyps. This study has shown for the first time that serum IGF-II may be a tumor marker in individuals with colorectal adenomas. Further studies are needed to validate these relationships in larger populations, including individuals undergoing colonoscopy.
-------------------------------------

10011648_234 - 0.756276673727 - science
[strain, gene, change, clavulanic, acid]

Genome-wide gene expression changes in an industrial clavulanic acid overproduction strain of Streptomyces clavuligerus
To increase production of the important pharmaceutical compound clavulanic acid, a ??-lactamase inhibitor, both random mutagenesis approaches and rational engineering of Streptomyces clavuligerus strains have been extensively applied. Here, for the first time, we compared genome-wide gene expression of an industrial S. clavuligerus strain, obtained through iterative mutagenesis, with that of the wild-type strain. Intriguingly, we found that the majority of the changes contributed not to a complex rewiring of primary metabolism but consisted of a simple upregulation of various antibiotic biosynthesis gene clusters. A few additional transcriptional changes in primary metabolism at key points seem to divert metabolic fluxes to the biosynthetic precursors for clavulanic acid. In general, the observed changes largely coincide with genes that have been targeted by rational engineering in recent years, yet the presence of a number of previously unexplored genes clearly demonstrates that functional genomic analysis can provide new leads for strain improvement in biotechnology. ?? 2010 The Authors. Journal compilation ?? 2010 Society for Applied Microbiology and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
-------------------------------------

10005581_234 - 0.720537792249 - medicine
[syndrome, irritable, bowel]

Psychological aspects of irritable bowel syndrome.
Patients with irritable bowel syndrome appear to suffer from more psychiatric disorders than control subjects although it remains to be established whether this is cause or effect. The chronic nature of the condition in conjunction with unsympathetic encounters with the medical profession often serves to exacerbate the situation.
-------------------------------------

10005096_234 - 0.942082223884 - science
[ganglion, basal, trade-off, dopamine, exploration-exploitation, action, model]

Dopaminergic Control of the Exploration-Exploitation Trade-Off via the Basal Ganglia.
We continuously face the dilemma of choosing between actions that gather new information or actions that exploit existing knowledge. This "exploration-exploitation" trade-off depends on the environment: stability favors exploiting knowledge to maximize gains; volatility favors exploring new options and discovering new outcomes. Here we set out to reconcile recent evidence for dopamine's involvement in the exploration-exploitation trade-off with the existing evidence for basal ganglia control of action selection, by testing the hypothesis that tonic dopamine in the striatum, the basal ganglia's input nucleus, sets the current exploration-exploitation trade-off. We first advance the idea of interpreting the basal ganglia output as a probability distribution function for action selection. Using computational models of the full basal ganglia circuit, we showed that, under this interpretation, the actions of dopamine within the striatum change the basal ganglia's output to favor the level of exploration or exploitation encoded in the probability distribution. We also found that our models predict striatal dopamine controls the exploration-exploitation trade-off if we instead read-out the probability distribution from the target nuclei of the basal ganglia, where their inhibitory input shapes the cortical input to these nuclei. Finally, by integrating the basal ganglia within a reinforcement learning model, we showed how dopamine's effect on the exploration-exploitation trade-off could be measurable in a forced two-choice task. These simulations also showed how tonic dopamine can appear to affect learning while only directly altering the trade-off. Thus, our models support the hypothesis that changes in tonic dopamine within the striatum can alter the exploration-exploitation trade-off by modulating the output of the basal ganglia.
-------------------------------------

10008612_234 - 0.803220568248 - science
[ige, protein, response, lactoferrin, igg, novel, form, glycosylation, recombinant, molecule]

Influence of protein expression system on elicitation of IgE antibody responses: experience with lactoferrin.
With increased interest in genetically modified (GM) crop plants there is an important need to understand the properties that contribute to the ability of such novel proteins to provoke immune and/or allergic responses. One characteristic that may be relevant is glycosylation, particularly as novel expression systems (e.g. bacterial to plant) will impact on the protein glycoprofile. The allergenicity (IgE inducing) and immunogenicity (IgG inducing) properties of wild type native human lactoferrin (NLF) from human milk (hm) and neutrophil granules (n) and a recombinant molecule produced in rice (RLF) have been assessed. These forms of lactoferrin have identical amino acid sequences, but different glycosylation patterns: hmNLF and nNLF have complex glycoprofiles including Lewis (Le)(x) structures, with particularly high levels of Le(x) expressed by nNLF, whereas RLF is simpler and rich in mannose residues. Antibody responses induced in BALB/c strain mice by intraperitoneal exposure to the different forms of lactoferrin were characterised. Immunisation with both forms of NLF stimulated substantial IgG and IgE antibody responses. In contrast, the recombinant molecule was considerably less immunogenic and failed to stimulate detectable IgE, irrespective of endotoxin and iron content. The glycans did not contribute to epitope formation, with equivalent IgE and IgG binding recorded for high titre anti-NLF antisera regardless of whether the immunising NLF or the recombinant molecule were used substrates in the analyses. These data demonstrate that differential glycosylation profiles can have a profound impact on protein allergenicity and immunogenicity, with mannose and Le(x) exhibiting opposing effects. These results have clear relevance for characterising the allergenic hazards of novel proteins in GM crops.
-------------------------------------

10011740_234 - 0.903501756338 - science
[oxide, stress, alloy, corrosion, tetragonal, phase, monoclinic, zirconium, transformation, transition]

Residual Stress and Phase Characterisation on Zirconium Oxides using Synchrotron X-ray Diffraction A
The present work was produced as part of the MUZIC consortium, a collaboration between a multi-university team from the UK and industrial partners working on the field of nuclear energy, fabrication of alloys and nuclear research. The aim of the project is to establish a multidiscipline mechanistic understanding of the corrosion and breakaway processes of zirconium alloys used as fuel cladding materials in the nuclear industry. A better understanding of the corrosion mechanism of zirconium alloys will not only aid the development of better performing alloys, but will also allow more accurate models to be developed to reliably predict the service life of existing alloys. This could lead to higher burn-up, increase of energy production and reduction of nuclear waste produced.This work seeks to provide a better understanding of the role of residual stresses in the oxide, which are produced during oxidation due to high Pilling-Bedworth ratio and their impact on oxide phase transformation and oxidation kinetics by employing high energy synchrotron X-ray diffraction techniques. This is achieved by observing how stresses change as oxide growth approaches and passes through transition of the corrosion kinetics, their evolution across the oxide thickness, in situ characterising stresses and phase growth early in oxidation process and how stress changes can affect corrosion properties.It was found that relatively high compressive stresses in the two oxide crystal structures are present. The stresses relax with time up to moments before transition where a possible threshold stress magnitude is reached to aid an extensive tetragonal to monoclinic phase transformation. This generalised tetragonal to monoclinic transformation is believed to produce highly stressed monoclinic crystal structure grains and cause defects in the oxide. The above observation is further supported by a decrease of the tetragonal zirconia content. This is the moment that the oxide looses its protective character and a transition of the corrosion kinetics occurs. By comparing different materials it was observed that the minimum magnitude of the tetragonal phase is lower in better performing alloys while the tetragonal content is some cases was relatively low. It is suggested that the amount of the tetragonal phase, in the oxide layer, is not as important as the rate of it transforming into monoclinic. The extent of tetragonal to monoclinic transformation, that introduces defects in the oxide, defines how protective an oxide layer is.The present work provides a contribution to the available knowledge of the importance of residual stresses in the oxide layer and metal substrate of zirconium alloys and how they can affect corrosion rates or act as a precursor to the corrosion transition.
-------------------------------------

10010994_234 - 0.70252329156 - science
[growth, oxide, oxygen]

Anodic growth of titanium oxide: Electrochemical behaviour and morphological evolution
The mechanism of growth of anodic titanium oxide in sulphuric acid has been investigated by potentiostatic and potentiodynamic anodizing, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy and transmission electron microscopy. It was found that most of the charge passed during growth is consumed in oxygen evolution at the oxide-solution interface and the measured current relates to the electronic conduction properties of the oxide. Further, it was confirmed that an amorphous to crystalline transition takes place during potentiodynamic growth, and the transition triggers the additional generation of oxygen bubbles that occurs within the oxide. Depending on the growth conditions, the oxygen bubbles can rupture with local re-growth of the film then occurring. ?? 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
-------------------------------------

10011805_234 - 0.856535440338 - science
[times, primates, anatomy, forelimb, cited, vein, comparative]

THE COMPARATIVE ANATOMY OF THE FORELIMB VEINS OF PRIMATES
Times Cited: 1
-------------------------------------

10005629_234 - 0.720871738648 - medicine
[sumatriptan, chest, oesophageal]

Is chest pain after sumatriptan oesophageal in origin?
3-5% of patients taking the 5HT1D agonist sumatriptan for migraine have chest discomfort, suggesting a cardiac origin. We have investigated an alternative explanation of an oesophageal cause in 24 volunteers after the subcutaneous administration of a supratherapeutic dose of sumatriptan (16 mg) or placebo in a randomised, double-blind crossover study. Sumatriptan did not alter the electrocardiogram but increased the amplitude (p < 0.001) and duration (p < 0.001) of oesophageal contractions without affecting velocity of propagation. Clinically abnormal motility was also increased (p = 0.001), and was more common in the 5 subjects with chest pain after sumatriptan. The effect of sumatriptan on oesophageal function provides an alternative explanation for the chest symptoms.
-------------------------------------

10003769_234 - 0.891275998823 - science
[convexity, experiment, symmetry, shape, contour, concavity, detection, advantage, task, visual]

The role of convexity in perception of symmetry and in visual short-term memory
Visual perception of shape is affected by coding of local convexities and concavities. For instance, a recent study reported that deviations from symmetry carried by convexities were easier to detect than deviations carried by concavities. We removed some confounds and extended this work from a detection of reflection of a contour (i.e., bilateral symmetry), to a detection of repetition of a contour (i.e.,
translational symmetry). We tested whether any convexity advantage is specific to bilateral symmetry in a two-interval (Experiment 1) and a single-interval (Experiment 2) detection task. In both, we found a convexity advantage only for repetition. When we removed the need to choose which region of the contour to monitor (Experiment 3) the effect disappeared. In a second series of studies, we again used shapes with multiple convex or concave features. Participants performed a change detection task in which only one of the features could change. We did not find any evidence that convexities are special in visual short-term memory, when the to-be-remembered features only changed shape (Experiment 4), when they changed shape and changed from concave to convex and vice versa (Experiment 5), or when these conditions were mixed (Experiment 6). We did find a small advantage for coding convexity as well as concavity over an isolated (and thus ambiguous) contour. The latter is consistent with the known effect of closure on processing of shape. We conclude that convexity plays a role in many perceptual tasks but that it does not have a basic encoding advantage over concavity.
-------------------------------------

10005572_234 - 0.945490367297 - medicine
[patient, gallstone, crohn, disease, ultrasound, control]

Ultrasound survey of gallstones and other hepatobiliary disorders in patients with Crohn's disease.
Abdominal ultrasound was performed in conjunction with liver function tests in 38 patients with small bowel Crohn's disease and a similar number of age- and sex-matched healthy controls. Five (13%) patients had had previous cholecystectomies for cholelithiasis, and eight (21%) were found to have gallstones on ultrasound. Thus, a total of 34% of patients as compared with 8% of controls had gallstones (P less than 0.01). Compared with 8% of controls, 53% of patients had evidence of at least one biochemical or ultrasonic hepatobiliary abnormality (P less than 0.001). A bright liver echo pattern may be indicative of portal triaditis. The high prevalence of gallstones in Crohn's disease should be considered in any patient who continues to complain of abdominal pain despite otherwise appearing to be in remission.
-------------------------------------

10003971_234 - 0.813891876749 - science
[cited, chelate, times, boron, cations, restrained, vol, intermolecular, borylation, electrophilic]

Chelate Restrained Boron Cations for Intermolecular Electrophilic Arene Borylation (vol 29, pg 241, 2010)
Times Cited: 0
-------------------------------------

10009703_234 - 0.823636288152 - science
[adverse, reaction, nanomedicine, factor]

Genomic perspectives in inter-individual adverse responses following nanomedicine administration: The way forward.
The underlying mechanism of intravenous infusion-related adverse reactions inherent to regulatory-approved nanomedicines still remains elusive. There are substantial inter-individual differences in observed adverse reactions, which may include cardiovascular, broncho-pulmonary, muco-cutaneous, neuro-psychosomatic and autonomic manifestations. Although nanomedicine-mediated triggering of complement activation has been suggested to be a significant contributing factor to these adverse events, complement activation may still proceed in non-responders. Whether these reactions share similar immunological mechanisms and underpinning genetic factors with drug hypersensitivity syndrome remains to be investigated. Genetic association studies could be a powerful tool to dissect causative factors and reveal the multiple molecular pathways that induce infusion related adverse reactions. It is envisaged that such research may lead to the design of reliable in vitro profiling tests for risk assessment and treatment decisions, thereby revolutionizing the practice of medicine with nanopharmaceuticals. Such procedures may further improve regulatory approval processes for nanomedicines currently in the pipeline and decrease the overall cost of health care. Here we discuss some key innate immunity genes and their polymorphisms in relation to nanomedicine infusion-mediated symptomatic responses.
-------------------------------------

10009967_234 - 0.780246545476 - science
[strain, germ, tube, serum, concentration, elongation, antifungal, inhibition]

Effect of imidazole antifungals on the development of germ tubes by strains of Candida albicans.
Three imidazole antifungals (ketoconazole, tioconazole and miconazole) were examined for their effect on germ tube development by synchronous blastospore populations and on actively growing germ tubes of three strains of Candida albicans. After incubation in serum for 4 h the largest differences in germ tube elongation between strains were detected at concentrations (0.005 mg/l) where minimal inhibition was observed. Germ tube elongation in antifungal-containing serum diminished with increasing concentration. Maximum inhibition occurred at concentrations of 0.5 mg/l. All three antifungals inhibited the rate of hyphal elongation by the strains over a 6 h period at this concentration. Tests where germinated blastospores of strain 3281 were transferred to serum containing 0.5 mg/l of antifungal indicated that all three drugs inhibited further elongation. However, the rate of inhibition was dependent upon the length of time germination had proceeded in serum alone prior to transfer to antifungal-containing serum.
-------------------------------------

10009750_234 - 0.873146934861 - technology_and_computing
[behaviour, prototype, variable, tpb, intention, predictive, pwm, actor, validity, abstainer]

Augmenting the theory of planned behaviour with the prototype/willingness model: predictive validity of actor versus abstainer prototypes for adolescents' health-protective and health-risk intentions.
OBJECTIVES: The present research tested: (a) whether prototype perceptions and descriptive norms from the prototype/willingness model (PWM; Gibbons, Gerrard, Blanton, & Russell, 1998) enhance the prediction of adolescents' intentions to engage in health-protective and health-risk behaviours after variables from the theory of planned behaviour (TPB; Ajzen, 1991) and past behaviour have been taken into account and (b) whether images of the type of person who engages in a health behaviour (actor prototypes) and images of the type of person who does not engage in a health behaviour (abstainer prototypes) have equivalent predictive validity. DESIGN: An experimental design with a single between participants factor (actor versus abstainer prototype) was employed. METHOD: Participants in this study were 247 school pupils who completed measures of TPB variables, PWM variables and past behaviour in relation to three health-protective and three health-risk behaviours. RESULTS: Findings indicated that PWM variables accounted for a significant proportion of the variance in behavioural intentions after TPB variables and past behaviour had been taken into account (Mean deltaR2=.05). Perceived similarity to prototypes was the most consistent additional predictor of intention. Actor and abstainer prototypes exhibited equivalent predictive validity. CONCLUSIONS: The present research suggests that variables from the PWM, especially prototype similarity, enhance the predictive validity of the TPB. The findings also provide new evidence that acquiring the characteristics of both health and risk images may be goals among adolescents and suggest that both healthy and risky prototypes constitute useful cognitive targets for interventions.
-------------------------------------

10003626_234 - 0.757699508955 - science
[cancer, biomarker, beginning, sample, page, detection, colleague, early, ovarian]

The sine qua non of discovering novel biomarkers for early detection of ovarian cancer: carefully selected preclinical samples.
This perspective discusses reports by Cramer and colleagues (beginning on page 365 in this issue of the journal) and Zhu and colleagues (beginning on page 375), which provide the first systematic and reliable comparison of a large number of candidate biomarkers for the early detection of ovarian cancer in a sample set well-suited for this purpose. This research has important implications for the future design of cancer biomarker studies.
-------------------------------------

10016815_234 - 0.754649881729 - science
[protein, function, classifier]

Predicting protein function by machine learning on amino acid sequences - A critical evaluation
Background: Predicting the function of newly discovered proteins by simply inspecting their amino acid sequence is one of the major challenges of post-genomic computational biology, especially when done without recourse to experimentation or homology information. Machine learning classifiers are able to discriminate between proteins belonging to different functional classes. Until now, however, it has been unclear if this ability would be transferable to proteins of unknown function, which may show distinct biases compared to experimentally more tractable proteins. Results: Here we show that proteins with known and unknown function do indeed differ significantly. We then show that proteins from different bacterial species also differ to an even larger and very surprising extent, but that functional classifiers nonetheless generalize successfully across species boundaries. We also show that in the case of highly specialized proteomes classifiers from a different, but more conventional, species may in fact outperform the endogenous species-specific classifier. Conclusion: We conclude that there is very good prospect of successfully predicting the function of yet uncharacterized proteins using machine learning classifiers trained on proteins of known function. ?? 2007 Al-Shahib et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd.
-------------------------------------

10007013_234 - 0.881354892397 - science
[particle, plume, similar, excess, aerosol, emission, oa, factor, co2, concentration]

Evolution of trace gases and particles emitted by a chaparral fire in California
Biomass burning (BB) is a major global source of trace gases and particles. Accurately representing the production and evolution of these emissions is an important goal for atmospheric chemical transport models. We measured a suite of gases and aerosols emitted from an 81 hectare prescribed fire in chaparral fuels on the central coast of California, US on 17 November 2009. We also measured physical and chemical changes that occurred in the isolated down-wind plume in the first similar to 4 h after emission. The measurements were carried out onboard a Twin Otter aircraft outfitted with an airborne Fourier transform infrared spectrometer (AFTIR), aerosol mass spectrometer (AMS), single particle soot photometer (SP2), nephelometer, LiCor CO2 analyzer, a chemiluminescence ozone instrument, and a wing-mounted meteorological probe. Our measurements included: CO2; CO; NOx; NH3; non-methane organic compounds; organic aerosol (OA); inorganic aerosol (nitrate, ammonium, sulfate, and chloride); aerosol light scattering; refractory black carbon (rBC); and ambient temperature, relative humidity, barometric pressure, and three-dimensional wind velocity. The molar ratio of excess O-3 to excess CO in the plume (Delta O-3/Delta CO) increased from -5.13 (+/- 1.13) x 10(-3) to 10.2 (+/- 2.16) x 10(-2) in similar to 4.5 h following smoke emission. Excess acetic and formic acid (normalized to excess CO) increased by factors of 1.73 +/- 0.43 and 7.34 +/- 3.03 (respectively) over the same time since emission. Based on the rapid decay of C2H4 we infer an in-plume average OH concentration of 5.27 (+/- 0.97) x 10(6) molec cm(-3), consistent with previous studies showing elevated OH concentrations in biomass burning plumes. Ammonium, nitrate, and sulfate all increased over the course of 4 h. The observed ammonium increase was a factor of 3.90 +/- 2.93 in about 4 h, but accounted for just similar to 36\% of the gaseous ammonia lost on a molar basis. Some of the gas phase NH3 loss may have been due to condensation on, or formation of, particles below the AMS detection range. NOx was converted to PAN and particle nitrate with PAN production being about two times greater than production of observable nitrate in the first similar to 4 h following emission. The excess aerosol light scattering in the plume (normalized to excess CO2) increased by a factor of 2.50 +/- 0.74 over 4 h. The increase in light scattering was similar to that observed in an earlier study of a biomass burning plume in Mexico where significant secondary formation of OA closely tracked the increase in scattering. In the California plume, however, Delta OA/Delta CO2 decreased sharply for the first hour and then increased slowly with a net decrease of similar to 20\% over 4 h. The fraction of thickly coated rBC particles increased up to similar to 85\% over the 4 h aging period. Decreasing OA accompanied by increased scattering/particle coating in initial aging may be due to a combination of particle coagulation and evaporation processes. Recondensation of species initially evaporated from the particles may have contributed to the subsequent slow rise in OA. We compare our results to observations from other plume aging studies and suggest that differences in environmental factors such as smoke concentration, oxidant concentration, actinic flux, and RH contribute significantly to the variation in plume evolution observations.
-------------------------------------

10018389_234 - 0.824915934774 - science
[mutant, cax, seed, metal, germination, role, stress, double, knockout, arabidopsis]

Knockout of multiple Arabidopsis cation/H(+) exchangers suggests isoform-specific roles in metal stress response, germination and seed mineral nutrition.
Cation/H(+) exchangers encoded by CAX genes play an important role in the vacuolar accumulation of metals including Ca(2+) and Mn(2+). Arabidopsis thaliana CAX1 and CAX3 have been previously shown to differ phylogenetically from CAX2 but the physiological roles of these different transporters are still unclear. To examine the functions and the potential of redundancy between these three cation transporters, cax1/cax2 and cax2/cax3 double knockout mutants were generated and compared with wild type and cax single knockouts. These double mutants had equivalent metal stress responses to single cax mutants. Both cax1 and cax1/cax2 had increased tolerance to Mg stress, while cax2 and cax2/cax3 both had increased sensitivity to Mn stress. The cax1/cax2 and cax2/cax3 mutants did not exhibit the deleterious developmental phenotypes previously seen with the cax1/cax3 mutant. However, these new double mutants did show alterations in seed germination, specifically a delay in germination time. These alterations correlated with changes in nutrient content within the seeds of the mutants, particularly the cax1/cax2 mutant which had significantly higher seed content of Ca and Mn. This study indicates that the presence of these Arabidopsis CAX transporters is important for normal germination and infers a role for CAX proteins in metal homeostasis within the seed.
-------------------------------------

10005587_234 - 0.903273943297 - science
[nicardipine, acid, basal]

Effect of nicardipine on gastric acid secretion in man.
The effect of nicardipine on basal and pentagastrin-stimulated gastric acid secretion in normal volunteers was investigated. When compared with saline, an intravenous infusion of nicardipine caused a significant decrease in peak acid output (from 37.8 mmol hour-1 to 28.8 mmol hour-1; P = 0.04) and a small reduction in aspirate volume. Nicardipine had no significant action on basal acid output or volume of aspirate. Proteolytic activity in both the basal and stimulated periods was unaffected by nicardipine as were serum gastrin concentrations. Although calcium channel blocking agents are theoretically antisecretory the present study suggests they are unlikely to have clinically useful therapeutic actions.
-------------------------------------

10007447_234 - 0.821335120954 - science
[erk5, cell, protein, kinase]

The extracellular-regulated protein kinase 5 (ERK5) promotes cell proliferation through the down-regulation of inhibitors of cyclin dependent protein kinases (CDKs).
Activation of the extracellular-regulated protein kinase 5 (ERK5) has been associated with mitogenic signal transduction. However, conflicting findings have challenged the idea that ERK5 is a critical regulator of cell proliferation. We have addressed this issue by testing the effect of the conditional loss of ERK5 in primary fibroblasts. We have discovered that ERK5 suppressed the expression of the cyclin dependent protein kinase (CDKs) inhibitors, p21 and p27, by decreasing mRNA and protein stability, respectively. As a result, low level CDK2 activity detected in ERK5-deficient cells correlated with a defect in G1 to S phase transition of the cell cycle. Similarly, we found that the malignant MDA-MB-231 human breast cancer cell line was dependent on ERK5 to proliferate. We propose that ERK5 blocks p21 expression in MDA-MB-231 cells via a mechanism that implicates c-Myc-dependent transcriptional regulation of the miR-17-92 cluster. Together with evidence that cancer patients with poor prognosis display a high level of expression of components of the ERK5 signaling pathway, these findings support the hypothesis that ERK5 can be a potential target for cancer therapy.
-------------------------------------

10018148_234 - 0.923201516806 - science
[aptamer, heparanase, enzyme, tumour, assay, cell, hpse1]

Development of novel single-stranded nucleic acid aptamers against the pro-angiogenic and metastatic enzyme heparanase (HPSE1).
Heparanase is an enzyme involved in extracellular matrix remodelling and heparan sulphate proteoglycan catabolism. It is secreted by metastatic tumour cells, allowing them to penetrate the endothelial cell layer and basement membrane to invade target organs. The release of growth factors at the site of cleaved heparan sulphate chains further enhance the potential of the tumour by encouraging the process of angiogenesis. This leads to increased survival and further proliferation of the tumour. Aptamers are single or double stranded oligonucleotides that recognise specific small molecules, peptides, proteins, or even cells or tissues and have shown great potential over the years as diagnostic and therapeutic agents in anticancer treatment. For the first time, single stranded DNA aptamers were successfully generated against the active heterodimer form of heparanase using a modified SELEX protocol, and eluted based on increasing affinity for the target. Sandwich ELISA assays showed recognition of heparanase by the aptamers at a site distinct from that of a polyclonal HPSE1 antibody. The binding affinities of aptamer to immobilised enzyme were high (7 × 10(7) to 8 × 10(7) M(-1)) as measured by fluorescence spectroscopy. Immunohistochemistry and immunofluorescence studies demonstrated that the aptamers were able to recognise heparanase with staining comparable or in some cases superior to that of the HPSE1 antibody control. Finally, matrigel assay demonstrated that aptamers were able to inhibit heparanase. This study provides clear proof of principle concept that nucleic acid aptamers can be generated against heparanase. These reagents may serve as useful tools to explore the functional role of the enzyme and in the future development of diagnostic assays or therapeutic reagents.
-------------------------------------

10003293_234 - 0.901330920584 - science
[human, receptor, aea, cannabinoid, endocannabinoid, kc]

Endocannabinoids modulate human epidermal keratinocyte proliferation and survival via the sequential engagement of cannabinoid receptor-1 and transient receptor potential vanilloid-1.
We have recently shown that lipid mediators of the emerging endocannabinoid system (ECS) are key players of growth control of the human pilosebaceous unit. In this study, we asked whether the prototypic endocannabinoid anandamide (N-arachidonoylethanolamine, AEA) has a role in growth and survival of epidermal keratinocytes (KCs). Using human cultured KCs and skin organ-culture models, and by employing combined pharmacological and molecular approaches, we provide early evidence that AEA markedly suppresses KC proliferation and induces cell death, both in vitro and in situ. Moreover, we present that these cellular actions are mediated by a most probably constitutively active signaling mechanism that involves the activation of the metabotropic cannabinoid receptor CB(1) and a sequential engagement of the "ionotropic cannabinoid receptor" transient receptor potential vanilloid-1 (TRPV1). Finally, we demonstrate that the cellular effects of AEA are most probably due to a Ca(2+) influx via the non-selective, highly Ca(2+)-permeable ion channel TRPV1, and the concomitant elevation of intracellular Ca(2+) concentration. The data reported here may encourage one to explore whether the targeted manipulation of the above signaling pathway of the cutaneous ECS could become a useful adjunct treatment strategy for hyperproliferative human dermatoses such as psoriasis or KC-derived skin tumors.
-------------------------------------

10016369_234 - 0.892947954289 - science
[protein, monoubiquitination, ubiquitinated, ubiquitin-binding, target]

Regulation of ubiquitin-binding proteins by monoubiquitination
Proteins containing ubiquitin-binding domains (UBDs) interact with ubiquitinated targets and regulate diverse biological processes, including endocytosis, signal transduction, transcription and DNA repair. Many of the UBD-containing proteins are also themselves monoubiquitinated, but the functional role and the mechanisms that underlie this modification are less well understood. Here, we demonstrate that monoubiquitination of the endocytic proteins Sts1, Sts2, Eps15 and Hrs results in intramolecular interactions between ubiquitin and their UBDs, thereby preventing them from binding in trans to ubiquitinated targets. Permanent monoubiquitination of these proteins, mimicked by the fusion of ubiquitin to their carboxyl termini, impairs their ability to regulate trafficking of ubiquitinated receptors. Moreover, we mapped the in vivo monoubiquitination site in Sts2 and demonstrated that its mutation enhances the Sts2-mediated effects of epidermal-growth-factor-receptor downregulation. We propose that monoubiquitination of ubiquitin-binding proteins inhibits their capacity to bind to and control the functions of ubiquitinated targets in vivo. ?? 2006 Nature Publishing Group.
-------------------------------------

10004860_234 - 0.930024076893 - medicine
[sexual, treatment, patient, function, fga, schizophrenia, antipsychotic, sga, drug]

Sexual function of patients with schizophrenia receiving first-generation (FGA) or second-generation antipsychotic (SGA) treatment.
Objectives. The aim of the study was to investigate sexual function in patients with schizophrenia receiving treatment with a first-generation antipsychotic (FGA) or a second-generation antipsychotic (SGA) drug. Sexual function is an important
aspect of human experience, which can be affected by antipsychotic drug treatment. Sexual dysfunction in patients with schizophrenia may be less prevalent with SGA than with FGA drug treatment. 
Methods. A cross-sectional prevalence study assessed sexual function in a sample of 144 patients with DSM-IV schizophrenia aged between 18 and 65, using the Derogatis Interview for Sexual Functioning (self-report version: DISF-SR). Two equal-sized groups (N=72) received treatment with an FGA or an SGA drug for at least 12 weeks. 
Results. No significant differences were seen on DISF-SR total score or subscale score between the two treatment groups. 
Conclusions. There are no differences in measured sexual function of non-randomised patients with schizophrenia treated with an FGA compared with SGA-treated patients.
-------------------------------------

10003656_234 - 0.89438988218 - medicine
[stroke, nurse, rehabilitation, greater, patient, research]

Improving stroke care through action research.
Stroke accounts for approximately 20% of beds occupied on general medical wards yet nurses felt inadequately prepared to participate fully in the interdisciplinary approach to stroke rehabilitation. An action research project was established to improve stroke care and rehabilitation in a general medical ward. Results indicate a correlation between knowledge and attitudes: the greater the nurse's understanding the more positive the nurse is towards nursing involvement in rehabilitation. It was concluded that nurses have a vital part to play in the rehabilitation of stroke patients and that their contribution can be enhanced through greater understanding. Further research is needed to determine the effects of greater nursing involvement in terms of quality of patient recovery and length of patient stay.
-------------------------------------

10009346_234 - 0.810505738308 - science
[red, fluorescent, protein]

Monomeric red fluorescent proteins with a large Stokes shift
Two-photon microscopy has advanced fluorescence imaging ofcellular processes in living animals. Fluorescent proteins in theblue-green wavelength range are widely used in two-photonmicroscopy; however, the use of red fluorescent proteins is limitedby the low power output of Ti-Sapphire lasers above 1,000 nm. Toovercome this limitation we have developed two red fluorescentproteins, LSS-mKate1 and LSS-mKate2, which possess large Stokesshifts with excitation/emission maxima at 463∕624 and 460∕605nm, respectively. These LSS-mKates are characterized by high pHstability, photostability, rapid chromophore maturation, and monomericbehavior. They lack absorbance in the green region, providingan additional red color to the commonly used red fluorescentproteins. Substantial overlap between the two-photon excitationspectra of the LSS-mKates and blue-green fluorophores enablesmulticolor imaging using a single laser. We applied this approachto a mouse xenograft model of breast cancer to intravitally studythe motility and Golgi-nucleus alignment of tumor cells as a functionof their distance from blood vessels. Our data indicate thatwithin 40 μm the breast cancer cells show significant polarizationtowards vessels in living mice.
-------------------------------------

10004336_234 - 0.738040580872 - science
[silicon, trivacancy, diffusion, defect, annealing]

Reconfigurations and diffusion of trivacancy in silicon
Disappearance of the divacancy (V2) and trivacancy (V3) complexes upon isochronal and isothermal annealing of electron irradiated Si:O crystals has been studied by means of deep level transient spectroscopy. The annealing studies have shown that the V2 and V3 defects are mobile in Si at T>200 °C and in oxygen-rich material are trapped by interstitial oxygen atoms so resulting in the appearance of V2O and V3O defects. The activation energies for diffusion of the V2 and V3 centers have been determined. Density functional modeling calculations have been carried out to investigate the migration and reorientation mechanisms of V3 in large silicon supercells. It is proposed that these comprise a sequence of transformations between V3(D3) and V3(C2v) configurations.
-------------------------------------

10005283_234 - 0.843362681603 - science
[keloid, scar, naevus, malignant, blue]

Keloid scar harbouring malignant blue naevus emphasises the need for excision biopsy and routine histology.
We report the finding of a malignant blue naevus of 14.3 mm Breslow thickness in association with a keloid scar on the earlobe of an Afrocaribbean gentleman. Malignant blue naevus is extremely rare and to date it has not been reported in association with keloid scars. We recommend routine histopathological examination of all excised keloid scars. Where histopathological services are limited, examination should certainly be carried out for keloids with unusual characteristics. Excision should be complete, rather than intralesional, in order to avoid leaving behind areas of potential neoplasia.
-------------------------------------

10009709_234 - 0.742902226584 - science
[serum, invasive, use, recommendation, gm, ag, ifd, cryptococcus, disease, patient]

ECIL recommendations for the use of biological markers for the diagnosis of invasive fungal diseases in leukemic patients and hematopoietic SCT recipients.
As culture-based methods for the diagnosis of invasive fungal diseases (IFD) in leukemia and hematopoietic SCT patients have limited performance, non-culture methods are increasingly being used. The third European Conference on Infections in Leukemia (ECIL-3) meeting aimed at establishing evidence-based recommendations for the use of biological tests in adult patients, based on the grading system of the Infectious Diseases Society of America. The following biomarkers were investigated as screening tests: galactomannan (GM) for invasive aspergillosis (IA); β-glucan (BG) for invasive candidiasis (IC) and IA; Cryptococcus Ag for cryptococcosis; mannan (Mn) Ag/anti-mannan (A-Mn) Ab for IC, and PCR for IA. Testing for GM, Cryptococcus Ag and BG are included in the revised EORTC/MSG (European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer/Mycoses Study Group) consensus definitions for IFD. Strong evidence supports the use of GM in serum (A II), and Cryptococcus Ag in serum and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) (A II). Evidence is moderate for BG detection in serum (B II), and the combined Mn/A-Mn testing in serum for hepatosplenic candidiasis (B III) and candidemia (C II). No recommendations were formulated for the use of PCR owing to a lack of standardization and clinical validation. Clinical utility of these markers for the early management of IFD should be further assessed in prospective randomized interventional studies.
-------------------------------------

10009733_234 - 0.967976715121 - medicine
[patient, albican, apeced, fluconazole, susceptibility, antifungal]

Decreased susceptibility of Candida albicans to azole antifungals: a complication of long-term treatment in autoimmune polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy (APECED) patients.
BACKGROUND: Autoimmune polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy (APECED, APS1) is an autosomal recessive disease exceptionally common in Finland. Most patients have chronic oral candidiasis from early childhood and this infection has been shown to be carcinogenic. Hence, patients receive repeated treatment and prophylactic courses of antifungals throughout life. In Finland, 92 patients have been diagnosed with APECED and 66 of them are currently alive. Our aim was to study the effect of long-term azole treatment on the candidal colonization of APECED patients and the influence on antifungal susceptibilities. METHODS: We evaluated the culture reports from 1994 to 2004 of 56 APECED patients followed in Helsinki University Central Hospital. Candida albicans strains of all 11 patients initially reported resistant (n = 27) and 12 patients reported susceptible (n = 16) to fluconazole were re-analysed for their susceptibility to fluconazole. Antifungal usage was analysed up to 30 years back. RESULTS: A total of 162 fungal cultures had been performed. Of these, 75% had been reported positive for Candida and 63% for C. albicans. Eleven patients (31.4%) had been reported to harbour at least once a C. albicans strain resistant to fluconazole. Re-analysis of the stored C. albicans strains originally reported to be resistant to fluconazole revealed a mean MIC of 19.5 mg/L. CONCLUSIONS: Multiple courses (>6) of fluconazole annually and low dose prophylaxis are major risk factors for persistent colonization with C. albicans with decreased susceptibility in APECED patients.
-------------------------------------

10012709_234 - 0.823258783986 - science
[circuit, model, nucleus, basal, kitai, aspect, external, behaviour, neuron, firing]

A pulsed neural network model of bursting in the basal ganglia.
We present new techniques for extending the functionality of spiking neurons which allow the incorporation of several aspects of neuron function previously confined to the domain of low level ion-channel based models. These aspects include spontaneous (or endogenous) firing, the complex interaction of multiple ion-species and the spatial distribution of synaptic contacts over the cell membrane. These ideas are applied to a neural circuit consisting of the cortex and a subset of the nuclei in the basal ganglia-the subthalamic nucleus (STN) and the external segment of the globus pallidus (GPe). This circuit has been studied extensively in vitro by Plenz and Kitai Plenz, D., & Kitai, S. T. (1999). A basal ganglia pacemaker formed by the subthalamic nucleus and external globus pallidus. Nature, 400 677-682 whose data we use to constrain our model. With respect to this circuit, we have obtained three main results. First, that its characteristic burst firing is due to a Ca2+ current mediated mechanism. Second, that noise can assist in the generation of bursting and, paradoxically, stabilise the network behaviour under synaptic weight variations. Third, that a variety of dendritic processing is necessary in order to obtain the full range of bursting behaviour.
-------------------------------------

10008710_234 - 0.762089738318 - science
[braf, cfdna, tumour, mutation, patient, study, detection, melanoma, sample]

Detection of BRAF mutations in the tumour and serum of patients enrolled in the AZD6244 (ARRY-142886) advanced melanoma phase II study.
BACKGROUND: This study investigated the potential clinical utility of circulating free DNA (cfDNA) as a source of BRAF mutation detection in patients enrolled into a phase II study of AZD6244, a specific MEK1/2 inhibitor, in patients with advanced melanoma. METHODS: BRAF mutations were detected using Amplification Refractory Mutation System allele-specific PCR. BRAF mutation status was assessed in serum-derived cfDNA from 126 patients enrolled into the study and from 94 matched tumour samples. RESULTS: Of 94 tumour samples, 45 (47.9%) were found to be BRAF mutation positive (BRAF+). Serum-derived cfDNA was BRAF+ in 33 of 126 (26.2%) samples, including in five samples for which tumour data were unavailable. Of BRAF+ tumours, 25 of 45 (55.6%) were BRAF+ in cfDNA. In three cases in which the tumour was negative, cfDNA was BRAF+. Progression-free survival (PFS) of patients with BRAF+ tumour and cfDNA was not significantly different compared with tumour BRAF+ but cfDNA BRAF-negative patients, indicating that cfDNA BRAF detection is not associated with poorer prognosis on PFS in stage III/IV advanced melanoma. CONCLUSIONS: These data demonstrate the feasibility of BRAF mutation detection in cfDNA of patients with advanced melanoma. Future studies should aim to incorporate BRAF mutation testing in cfDNA to further validate this biomarker for patient selection.
-------------------------------------

10010304_234 - 0.930205188617 - science
[environmental, genetical, genomic, perturbation, molecular]

Generalizing genetical genomics: getting added value from environmental perturbation
Genetical genomics is a useful approach for studying the effect of genetic perturbations on biological systems at the molecular level. However, molecular networks depend on the environmental conditions and, thus, a comprehensive understanding of biological systems requires studying them across multiple environments. We propose a generalization of genetical genomics, which combines genetic and sensibly chosen environmental perturbations, to study the plasticity of molecular networks. This strategy forms a crucial step toward understanding why individuals respond differently to drugs, toxins, pathogens, nutrients and other environmental influences. Here we outline a strategy for selecting and allocating individuals to particular treatments, and we discuss the promises and pitfalls of the generalized genetical genomics approach. ?? 2008 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
-------------------------------------

10004877_234 - 0.915337307252 - medicine
[improvement, patient, clozapine, panss, subjective, health, mental, week, dai, score]

Patients’ subjective rating of mental health improvement on clozapine Abstract. 12th Biennial Winter Workshop on Schizophrenia, Davos, Switzerland.
Background: The subjective experience of patients with schizophrenia, receiving antipsychotic medication has been a neglected research area.Methods: In a randomised controlled trial comparing the impact of new atypical antipsychotic drugs versus clozapine, 67 out of 136 patients with schizophrenia were randomised to receive clozapine. Baseline and 12 week assessments included the PANSS, DAI, and the Kemp Compliance scale.Results: The greater percentage improvement in total PANSS scores in patients randomised to clozapine was statistically significant when compared to the atypical group at 12 weeks (p < 0.05). Patients’ subjective rating of their mental health improvement since commencing clozapine treatment correlated significantly with actual percentage improvement in PANSS scores from baseline to week 12 (p < 0.01). Significant correlations were also observed between the patients’ subjective rating of their mental health improvement and both DAI score and theg12 PANSS insight item (p < 0.05). In a regression analysis, DAI score at week 12 explained 26% of the variance in patients’ subjective rating of mental health improvement with clozapine. Percentage PANSS improvement explained a further 8% of the variance.Conclusion: Patients in an RCT of clozapine versus atypicals were able to subjectively rate their own improved mental health status, validated by objective improvement on the PANSS. This was predicted by drug attitude as measured by the DAI. Subjective reports are a useful and valid outcome measure in drug treatment trials.
-------------------------------------

10018174_234 - 0.881660426225 - science
[selenium, elemental, potential, transformation, nanosphere, different, geobacter, sulfurreducen, selenite, phase]

Investigating different mechanisms for biogenic selenite transformations: Geobacter sulfurreducens, Shewanella oneidensis and Veillonella atypica
The metal-reducing bacteria Geobacter sulfurreducens, Shewanella oneidensis and Veillonella atypica, use different mechanisms to transform toxic, bioavailable sodium selenite to less toxic, non-mobile elemental selenium and then to selenide in anaerobic environments, offering the potential for in situ and ex situ bioremediation of contaminated soils, sediments, industrial effluents, and agricultural drainage waters. The products of these reductive transformations depend on both the organism involved and the reduction conditions employed, in terms of electron donor and exogenous extracellular redox mediator. The intermediary phase involves the precipitation of elemental selenium nanospheres and the potential role of proteins in the formation of these structures is discussed. The bionanomineral phases produced during these transformations, including both elemental selenium nanospheres and metal selenide nanoparticles, have catalytic, semiconducting and light-emitting properties, which may have unique applications in the realm of nanophotonics. This research offers the potential to combine remediation of contaminants with the development of environmentally friendly manufacturing pathways for novel bionanominerals.
-------------------------------------

10004279_234 - 0.892930579118 - science
[fermion, mass]

Anomalous Fermion Mass Generation at Three Loops
We present a novel mechanism for generating gauge-invariant fermion masses through global anomalies at the three loop level. In a gauge theory, global anomalies are triggered by the possible existence of scalar or pseudoscalar states and heavy fermions, whose masses may not necessarily result from spontaneous symmetry breaking. The implications of this mass-generating mechanism for model building are discussed, including the possibility of creating low-scale fermion masses by quantum gravity effects.
-------------------------------------

10006969_234 - 0.729455458898 - science
[model, tissue, electrical, action, atrium, atrial, remodelling, wave, normal, effect]

Virtual tissue engineering of the human atrium: modelling pharmacological actions on atrial arrhythmogenesis.
Computational models of human atrial cells, tissues and atria have been developed. Cell models, for atrial wall, crista terminalis, appendage, Bachmann's bundle and pectinate myocytes are characterised by action potentials, ionic currents and action potential duration (APD) restitution. The principal effect of the ion channel remodelling of persistent atrial fibrillation (AF), and a mutation producing familial AF, was APD shortening at all rates. Electrical alternans was abolished by the modelled action of Dronedarone. AF induced gap junctional remodelling slows propagation velocity at all rates. Re-entrant spiral waves in 2-D models are characterised by their frequency, wavelength, meander and stability. For homogenous models of normal tissue, spiral waves self-terminate, due to meander to inexcitable boundaries, and by dissipation of excitation. AF electrical remodelling in these homogenous models led to persistence of spiral waves, and AF fibrotic remodelling to their breakdown into fibrillatory activity. An anatomical model of the atria was partially validated by the activation times of normal sinus rhythm. The use of tissue geometry from clinical MRI, and tissue anisotropy from ex vivo diffusion tensor magnetic resonance imaging is outlined. In the homogenous model of normal atria, a single scroll breaks down onto spatio-temporal irregularity (electrical fibrillation) that is self-terminating; while in the AF remodelled atria the fibrillatory activity is persistent. The persistence of electrical AF can be dissected in the model in terms of ion channel and intercellular coupling processes, that can be modified pharmacologically; the effects of anatomy, that can be modified by ablation; and the permanent effects of fibrosis, that need to be prevented.
-------------------------------------

10009950_234 - 0.763748950279 - science
[biology, candidosis, tj, non-pregnant, tract, journal, genital, obstetrics, gynecology, european]

Candidosis of the genital tract in non-pregnant women.
TJ: EUROPEAN JOURNAL OF OBSTETRICS, GYNECOLOGY, AND REPRODUCTIVE BIOLOGY.
-------------------------------------

10009976_234 - 0.865052991686 - science
[antigen, aspergillosis, infection, invasive, antibody, attempt, convalescent, antiserum]

Sero-diagnosis of invasive aspergillosis: attempts to determine antigen and antibody relevance to infection.
Attempt was made to define antigens and antisera which might prove useful in diagnosis of invasive aspergillosis in man. A convalescent antiserum (serum from rabbits after liver infection with Aspergillus fumigatus conidia) which might be more representative of immunological reaction to fungal growth in vivo, did not react in enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay with commerical antigens which are used at present in attempts to detect antibody response in systemic infections in man. However, this convalescent antiserum reacted with antigens from a range of fungal extracts. Antigens from young culture filtrates in particular the 24th culture filtrate are advocated as the standard antigens for antibody detection using conventional immunoprecipitation techniques. For the detection of circulating antigens, the use of convalescent antiserum in enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay might be promising in the early diagnosis of invasive aspergillosis.
-------------------------------------

10011087_234 - 0.930539702871 - science
[electrochemical, formation, green, study, time-resolved, x-ray, rust, sulfate, scattering]

Formation of green rust sulfate: A combined in situ time-resolved X-ray scattering and electrochemical study
cited By (since 1996) 6
-------------------------------------

10008198_234 - 0.733360462925 - science
[density, breast, cancer, risk, change, screen, mammogram]

Longitudinal Change in Mammographic Density and Association with Breast Cancer Risk: a Case-Control Study
High mammographic breast density is associated with increased risk of breast cancer, but how risk varies with longitudinal change in density is less clear. To investigate, a case-control study of 30 women with screen-detected cancer and 30 women with a normal mammogram, all with two previous nor-mal mammograms, was conducted. Percentage density for all mammograms was estimated with the thresholding software Cumulus. Mean density at first screen was not significantly different in cases and controls in contralateral (36.5 vs. 32.6, p = 0.23) or ipsilateral (36.0 vs. 32.9 p = 0.37) breasts, but mean re-duction in density from first to third screen was significantly different in both contralateral (10.7 vs. 5.1, p = 0.02) and ipsilateral (11.7 vs. 6.2, p = 0.04) breasts. Using logistic regression, and controlling for age and HRT use, breast cancer risk was found to be associated with change in density from first to third screen.
-------------------------------------

10005259_234 - 0.844597227359 - science
[technique, radial, vessel, distal, artery]

Distal revascularisation/replantation using the reversed radial artery.
We describe a technique using the reversed radial artery for distal revascularisation or replantation in the hand. This technique has been used for revascularisation following crush avulsion injuries associated with a large zone of trauma and polydigit replantation. The technique involves dividing the radial artery and venae comitantes proximally and mobilising it distally into the hand for anastomosis. Temporary 'syndactylisation' of adjacent digits is also described. This can be used to convert multiple digits into a single vascular unit and to provide a bed for the transposed radial vessels. These techniques are an option when there is extensive injury to distal vessels such that end-to-end anastomosis is not possible and interposition venous micrografting may be difficult or prone to failure due to poor quality recipient vessels and the need to place grafts in a traumatised bed.
-------------------------------------

10005301_234 - 0.740885552587 - science
[postsynaptic, receptor, psd, synaptic, structure, psd-95, mechanism, membrane]

A Structural Investigation of the Postsynaptic Density Protein, PSD-95
The mechanism known as Long-Term Potentiation (LTP), which is perhaps the most established mechanism associated with memory and learning, describes the Hebbian postulate that “neurons that fire together, wire together”.  LTP refers to the upregulation of synaptic strength in response to high activity and can be subdivided into distinct phases.  Early-LTP involves the phosphorylation of neurotransmitter receptors while Late-LTP involves the increase in expression of receptors at the postsynaptic membrane.  These are long-term, stable perturbations of synaptic activity, lasting from hours to weeks.  However, more subtle mechanisms controlling shorter-term plastic changes in synaptic function lie in the spatial distribution of postsynaptic receptors.  In glutamatergic synapses within the mammalian CNS the distribution of neurotransmitter receptors is controlled by a scaffold of proteins under the postsynaptic membrane known as the PostSynaptic Density (PSD). This complex has been observed to change shape on a rapid scale, however little is understood about its macromolecular structure.The PSD anchors glutamate receptors within the postsynaptic membrane along with metabotropic receptors and cytoplasmic enzymes that modulate synaptic function and PSD and dendritic spine morphology.  Much of what is understood on the macro-molecular structure of the PSD is based on knowledge of known binding partners.  A recent paper within the group presented the PSD-95-Kir2.1 sub-complex of the PSD using a multi-disciplinary structural approach, blending Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM) and solution scattering models with high-resolution X-ray and NMR structures for individual folded domains.  In this thesis the solution state structure of PSD-95 is examined more closely.  Deletion constructs of PSD-95 have been obtained by expressing subcloned fragments of the gene from Homo sapiens in an E. coli expression system and purifying them through a combination of IMAC, ion exchange chromatography and gel filtration.  The PDZ region is rigorously described using Small Angle X-ray Scattering and is orthogonally validated by comparing the models against hydrodynamic data for the constructs.  The PDZ12 region was crystallized and subjected to extensive optimisation to improve the resulting diffraction, falling just short of a molecular replacement structure.  Attempts were made to crystallize the PDZ3 domain with the K¬ir¬2.1 C-terminus.  PSD-95 dynamics was also investigated using Deuterium Exchange Mass Spectrometry (DXMS) to test a hypothesis for an internal binding interaction but was found not to be present using the methods developed.
-------------------------------------

10010962_234 - 0.856786984231 - science
[cell, cancer, stromal, fibroblast, tumor]

Stromal-epithelial metabolic coupling in cancer: integrating autophagy and metabolism in the tumor microenvironment.
Cancer cells do not exist as pure homogeneous populations in vivo. Instead they are embedded in "cancer cell nests" that are surrounded by stromal cells, especially cancer associated fibroblasts. Thus, it is not unreasonable to suspect that stromal fibroblasts could influence the metabolism of adjacent cancer cells, and visa versa. In accordance with this idea, we have recently proposed that the Warburg effect in cancer cells may be due to culturing cancer cells by themselves, out of their normal stromal context or tumor microenvironment. In fact, when cancer cells are co-cultured with fibroblasts, then cancer cells increase their mitochondrial mass, while fibroblasts lose their mitochondria. An in depth analysis of this phenomenon reveals that aggressive cancer cells are "parasites" that use oxidative stress as a "weapon" to extract nutrients from surrounding stromal cells. Oxidative stress in fibroblasts induces the autophagic destruction of mitochondria, by mitophagy. Then, stromal cells are forced to undergo aerobic glycolysis, and produce energy-rich nutrients (such as lactate and ketones) to "feed" cancer cells. This mechanism would allow cancer cells to seed anywhere, without blood vessels as a food source, as they could simply induce oxidative stress wherever they go, explaining how cancer cells survive during metastasis. We suggest that stromal catabolism, via autophagy and mitophagy, fuels the anabolic growth of tumor cells, promoting tumor progression and metastasis. We have previously termed this new paradigm "The Autophagic Tumor Stroma Model of Cancer Metabolism", or the "Reverse Warburg Effect". We also discuss how glutamine addiction (glutaminolysis) in cancer cells fits well with this new model, by promoting oxidative mitochondrial metabolism in aggressive cancer cells.
-------------------------------------

10003313_234 - 0.915198632762 - technology_and_computing
[hardware, model, system, simulation, network, pacman, configuration, spinnaker, parallel]

A hierachical configuration system for a massively parallel neural hardware platform
Simulation of large networks of neurons is a powerful and increasingly prominent methodology for investigate brain functions and structures. Dedicated parallel hardware is a natural candidate for simulating the dynamic activity of many non-linear units communicating asynchronously. It is only scientifically useful, however, if the simulation tools can be configured and run easily and quickly. We present a method to map network models to computational nodes on the SpiNNaker system, a programmable parallel neurally-inspired hardware architecture, by exploiting the hierarchies built in the model. This PArtitioning and Configuration MANager (PACMAN) system supports arbitrary network topologies and arbitrary membrane potential and synapse dynamics, and (most importantly) decouples the model from the device, allowing a variety of languages (PyNN, Nengo, etc.) to drive the simulation hardware. Model representation operates on a Population/Projection level rather than a single-neuron and connection level, exploiting hierarchical properties to lower the complexity of allocating resources and mapping the model onto the system. PACMAN can be thus be used to generate structures coming from different models and front-ends, either with a host-based process, or by parallelising it on the SpiNNaker machine itself to speed up the generation process greatly. We describe the approach with a first implementation of the framework used to configure the current generation of SpiNNaker machines and present results from a set of key benchmarks. The system allows researchers to exploit dedicated simulation hardware which may otherwise be difficult to program. In effect, PACMAN provides automated hardware acceleration for some commonly used network simulators while also pointing towards the advantages of hierarchical configuration for large, domain-specific hardware systems.
-------------------------------------

10011016_234 - 0.786167131457 - science
[fe, condition, alkaline, crystallization, pb, hematite, effect]

Crystallization of hematite (??-Fe 2O 3) under alkaline condition: The effects of Pb
cited By (since 1996) 3
-------------------------------------

10011803_234 - 0.791752266427 - science
[bone]

Microfocus small angle X-ray scattering reveals structural features in archaeological bone samples: Detection of changes in bone mineral habit and size
Times Cited: 17
-------------------------------------

10011846_234 - 0.839493256597 - finance
[income, finance, ownership, innovation, social]

Escaping the tyranny of earned income? The failure of finance as social innovation
Before the crisis which started in 2007, the mass marketing of retail financial products in high income countries since the early 1980s was understood through rhetorics about individual emancipation as the ‘democratisation of finance’ and ‘ownership society’, where supporters and critics debated in a shared framework. From a post 2007 perspective, it is time to revalue these developments. This paper changes the frame around the debate and constructs theextension of credit and ownership as a major social innovation led by profit seeking retail banks. It then presents empirical evidence from the United States, which suggests that the extension of credit and asset ownership in an unequal society is self defeating because it does not abolish the tyranny of earned income and, indeed, it tightens the vice insofar as low income individuals and households accumulate debt but not assets. The implication is that finance as privately led social innovation has failed and it is time for fundamental rethinking of much that has been taken for granted.
-------------------------------------

10003469_234 - 0.834565724628 - science
[neurotransmitter, astrocyte, extracellular, space, cell, chemical, neural]

Neurotransmitters and Integration in Neuronal-Astroglial Networks.
Two major neural cell types, glia, astrocytes in particular, and neurones can release chemical transmitters that act as soluble signalling compounds for intercellular communication. Exocytosis, a process which depends on an increase in cytosolic Ca(2+) levels, represents a common denominator for release of neurotransmitters, stored in secretory vesicles, from these neural cells. While neurones rely predominately on the immediate entry of Ca(2+) from the extracellular space to the cytosol in this process, astrocytes support their cytosolic Ca(2+) increases by appropriating this ion from the intracellular endoplasmic reticulum store and extracellular space. Additionally, astrocytes can release neurotransmitters using a variety of non-vesicular pathways which are mediated by an assortment of plasmalemmal channels and transporters. Once a neuronal and/or astrocytic neurotransmitter is released into the extracellular space, it can activate plasma membrane neurotransmitter receptors on neural cells, causing autocrine and/or paracrine signalling. Moreover, chemical transmission is essential not only for homocellular, but also for heterocellular bi-directional communication in the brain. Further detailed understanding of chemical transmission will aid our comprehension of the brain (dys)function in heath and disease.
-------------------------------------

100075_102 - 0.76609312939 - technology_and_computing
[collaboration, design, format, long-distance, teamwork, storytelling, presenter, student, virtual, project]

Case Study: “Hair meets Design”: The Application of Storytelling in the Context of Long-Distance Collaboration and Virtual Teamwork
<p>Virtual teamwork and long distance collaboration is an increasingly attractive option in design education especially when students and other participants, (for example, industry guests or sponsors) cannot meet in the same physical place or classroom.</p>
<p>
The constant improvement in technology allows this type of electronic communication to be increasingly accepted as an appropriate format for collaboration and evaluation of student projects. </p>
<p>
This paper discusses the collaboration between members of a company in Germany and a group of industrial design students in California. It will present the work flow, the evaluation tools and the formats introduced during the process.</p>
<p>
Since the participants of this project could not meet physically to discuss and evaluate ideas, it was imperative for the teams to develop standard visual formats that were easy to understand and re-utilize. These formats had to be flexible enough for the purpose of adding comments from the evaluators. </p>
<p>
Because the physical presence of the presenter is missing, it is necessary to adjust the content and layout of the messages in order to make them more relevant and self-explanatory. The message has to be easy to understand without the help of a presenter or lecturer. </p>
<p>
One of the most significant questions in this project was how to present multiple “layers of information” in one single image at the same time (for example, how to depict work flow, time sequence and object hierarchy in one single frame). </p>
<p>
In a normal situation (where the presenter is physically present in front of an audience) he/she can verbally add secondary information that would not be visually included but it is necessary in order to understand the relevance of the image being presented. This additional verbal information could be related to time, hierarchy, etc.</p>
<p>
This paper will discuss the development and evaluation of visual formats that present multiple layers of information in one single image. It describes the methods used and reports the solutions. Ultimately, this paper explains the relevance of using storytelling in the context of long-distance design collaboration.
</p>
<p>
<strong>Keywords:</strong> <br />
Virtual Teamwork; Long-Distance Collaboration; Storytelling; Infographics</p>
-------------------------------------

10009361_234 - 0.743803979998 - science
[footprint, surface, tof-sim, cell, bacterial, eukaryotic]

Spectroscopy in the analysis of bacterial and eukaryotic cell footprints on implant surfaces.
We tested the suitability of two spectroscopic methods, x-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and time of flight secondary ion mass spectrometry (ToF-SIMS), in the recognition of bacterial and eukaryotic cell footprints on implant surfaces. Human mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) and Staphylococcus aureus were cultured on sample surfaces and detached using trypsin. Scanning electron microscopy confirmed that the processed surfaces did not contain any human or microbial cells. The footprints were then analysed using XPS and ToF-SIMS. XPS results showed no significant differences between the footprints, but principal component analysis of the ToF-SIMS data enabled clear separation of MSC-footprints from the S. aureus and co-culture footprints (p < 0.03). ToF-SIMS also demonstrated 'race for the surface' between proteins, which suggest surface charge (zeta-potential) dependent protein adsorption. ToF-SIMS differentiated eukaryotic and bacterial footprints and has potential for post-hoc detection of implant-related infections based on the typical ToF-SIMS spectra.
-------------------------------------

10007000_234 - 0.91541814203 - science
[digestion, blg, reactivity, allergenic, pc]

Effect of simulated gastro-duodenal digestion on the allergenic reactivity of beta-lactoglobulin.
UNLABELLED: ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Cow's milk (CM) allergy affects about 2% of infants. The allergenicity of dietary proteins, including those from CM, has been related to their digestibility although the generality of the link and its causality remains to be demonstrated. In this study we use an in vitro digestion system, to investigate the digestibility of β-lactoglobulin (blg) during gastrointestinal transit and to assess the impact of this process on blg allergenic reactivity in CM allergic children. METHODS: Blg digesta were prepared using an in vitro digestion protocol simulating either gastric digestion alone or followed by duodenal digestion with or without phosphatidylcholine (PC). Biochemical analysis of blg digesta was performed by SDS-PAGE and their concentration was measured by a sandwich ELISA. Assessment of their allergenic reactivity was done in vitro by EAST inhibition, specific basophil activation (basotest) and lymphocyte proliferation (PCNA-flow cytometry) assays using sera and cells from patients allergic to blg and in vivo by skin prick testing (SPT) of these patients. RESULTS: Blg was only broken down to smaller peptides after gastro-duodenal digestion although a sizeable amount of intact protein still remained. Digestion did not modify the IgE binding capacity of blg except for gastro-duodenal digestion performed in the absence of PC. These results are consistent with the quantity of intact blg remaining in the digesta. Overall both gastric and gastroduodenal digestion enhanced activation of sensitized basophils and proliferation of sensitized lymphocytes by blg. However, there was a tendency towards reduction in mean diameter of SPT following digestion, the PC alone during phase 1 digestion causing a significant increase in mean diameter. CONCLUSIONS: Digestion did not reduce the allergenic reactivity of blg to a clinically insignificant extent, PC inhibiting digestion and thereby protecting blg allergenic reactivity. SPT reactivity was reduced compared to blg immunoreactivity in in vitro tests.
-------------------------------------

10013645_234 - 0.787239042394 - medicine
[surgery, valve, aortic]

Almanac 2012--adult cardiac surgery: the national society journals present selected research that has driven recent advances in clinical cardiology.
This review covers the important publications in adult cardiac surgery in the last few years, including the current evidence base for surgical revascularisation and the use of off-pump surgery, bilateral internal mammary arteries and endoscopic vein harvesting. The changes in conventional aortic valve surgery are described alongside the outcomes of clinical trials and registries for transcatheter aortic valve implantation, and the introduction of less invasive and novel approaches of conventional aortic valve replacement surgery. Surgery for mitral valve disease is also considered, with particular reference to surgery for asymptomatic degenerative mitral regurgitation.
-------------------------------------

10008312_234 - 0.775829546183 - science
[cell, np, neurite, degenerate, outgrowth, human, bdnf, neural]

Degenerate Human Nucleus Pulposus Cells Promote Neurite Outgrowth in Neural Cells
Innervation of nociceptive nerve fibres into the normally aneural nucleus pulposus (NP) of the intervertebral disc (IVD) occurs during degeneration resulting in discogenic back pain. The neurotrophins nerve growth factor (NGF) and brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF), which are associated with stimulation of axonal outgrowth and nociception by neuronal cells, are both expressed by NP cells, with BDNF levels increasing with disease severity. However the mechanism of interaction between human NP cells and neural cells has yet to be fully elucidated. Therefore the aim of this study was to determine whether non-degenerate or degenerate human NP cells inhibit or stimulate neural outgrowth and whether any outgrowth is mediated by NGF or BDNF. Human NP cells from non-degenerate and degenerate IVD were cultured in alginate beads then co-cultured for 48 hours with human SH-SY5Y neuroblastoma cells. Co-culture of non-degenerate NP cells with neural cells resulted in both an inhibition of neurite outgrowth and reduction in percentage of neurite expressing cells. Conversely co-culture with degenerate NP cells resulted in an increase in both neurite length and percentage of neurite expressing cells. Addition of anti-NGF to the co-culture with degenerate cells resulted in a decrease in percentage of neurite expressing cells, while addition of anti-BDNF resulted in a decrease in both neurite length and percentage of neurite expressing cells. Our findings show that while non-degenerate NP cells are capable of inhibiting neurite outgrowth from human neural cells, degenerate NP cells stimulate outgrowth. Neurotrophin blocking studies demonstrated that both NGF and BDNF, secreted by degenerate NP cells, may play a role in this stimulation with BDNF potentially playing the predominant role. These findings suggest that NP cells are capable of regulating nerve ingrowth and that neoinnervation occurring during IVD degeneration may be stimulated by the NP cells themselves.
-------------------------------------

10009507_234 - 0.800701563285 - science
[lignin]

Off-line pyrolysis and compound-specific stable carbon isotope analysis of lignin moieties: a new method for determining the fate of lignin residues in soil
Dungait, Jennifer A. J. Stear, Natalie A. van Dongen, Bart E. Bol, Roland Evershed, Richard P.
-------------------------------------

10004706_234 - 0.81924405939 - science
[erad, translocation, phylogenetic, importomer, peroxisomal, mechanistic, protein, eukaryotic, analysis, selma]

Making new out of old: recycling and modification of an ancient protein translocation system during eukaryotic evolution. Mechanistic comparison and phylogenetic analysis of ERAD, SELMA and the peroxisomal importomer.
At first glance the three eukaryotic protein translocation machineries-the ER-associated degradation (ERAD) transport apparatus of the endoplasmic reticulum, the peroxisomal importomer and SELMA, the pre-protein translocator of complex plastids-appear quite different. However, mechanistic comparisons and phylogenetic analyses presented here suggest that all three translocation machineries share a common ancestral origin, which highlights the recycling of pre-existing components as an effective evolutionary driving force. Editor's suggested further reading in BioEssays ERAD ubiquitin ligases Abstract.
-------------------------------------

10018159_234 - 0.853511527927 - science
[tc, phase, sediment, hydrous, reoxidation, tco2-like, fe, behaviour, amorphous, tco4]

An X-ray absorption study of the fate of technetium in reduced and reoxidised sediments and mineral phases
Technetium is a long lived (2.13 x 10(5) a), beta emitting radionuclide which is a groundwater contaminant at a number of nuclear facilities throughout the world. Its environmental behaviour is primarily governed by its redox state. Under oxic conditions it forms the highly soluble pertechnetate (TcO4-) ion; under reducing conditions it forms the poorly soluble, reduced forms of Tc, particularly the Tc(IV) ion which is expected to precipitate as hydrous TcO2 above its solubility limit (10(-9) mol l(-1) at similar to pH 7) or to be strongly sorbed to mineral surfaces at lower concentrations. Thus the redox cycling behaviour of Tc is predicted to be key to its environmental behaviour in the natural and engineered environment. Here the results of a series of X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS) experiments which examine the oxidation state and coordination environment of Tc in a range of estuarine, aquifer and freshwater sediment suspensions, and in an environmentally relevant amorphous Fe(II) phase under both reduced and reoxidised biogeochemical conditions are presented. In reduced sediments and the amorphous Fe(II) phase prior to reoxidation, XAS results show that Tc was retained as hydrous TcO2-like phases across all samples. Under air reoxidation, experiments showed significant (up to 80\%) remobilisation of Tc to solution as TcO4-. In pre-reduced freshwater sediments, aquifer sediments and the amorphous Fe(II) phase oxidised with air, XAS indicated that Tc remained associated with the solids as hydrous TcO2-like phases. By contrast, in air reoxidised estuarine sediment XAS analysis suggested that both hydrous TcO2-like phases and TcO4 were retained within the sediment. Finally, when microbial ly-mediated NO3 reoxidation occurred in estuarine and aquifer sediment slurries, experiments showed comparatively low (<8\%) remobilisation of Tc from solids over similar timescales to air reoxidation experiments, whilst XAS again showed that both hydrous TcO2-like phases and TcO4 were retained within the sediment. By contrast, in the amorphous Fe(II) phase, although NO3 reoxidation again led to low (<4\%) remobilisation of Tc from solids, XAS analysis showed that Tc was retained as hydrous TcO2-like phases alone. These results are discussed in the context of the redox cycling behaviour of Tc in the natural and engineered environment. (C) 2007 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
-------------------------------------

10008625_234 - 0.891037354439 - science
[chemical, epigenetic, allergic, mechanism, response, immune, drug, allergen]

Regulation of Allergic Responses to Chemicals and Drugs: Possible Roles of Epigenetic Mechanisms.
There is increasing evidence that epigenetic regulation of gene expression plays a pivotal role in the orchestration of immune and allergic responses. Such regulatory mechanisms have potentially important implications for the acquisition of sensitization to chemical and drug allergens, and in determining the vigor, characteristics and longevity of allergic responses. Importantly, the discovery of long-lasting epigenetic alterations in specific immunoregulatory genes provides a mechanistic basis for immune cell memory, and thereby the potential of chemical allergens to influence the subsequent orientation of the adaptive immune system. In this article we consider the implications of epigenetic mechanisms for the development of sensitization to chemical and drug allergens and the form that allergic reactions will take.
-------------------------------------

10003295_234 - 0.928307154163 - science
[skin, lesional, ll-37, expression, immunoreactivity, epidermis, amp, hf, inflammation, apocrine]

Immunohistological pointers to a possible role for excessive cathelicidin (LL-37) expression by apocrine sweat glands in the pathogenesis of hidradenitis suppurativa/acne inversa.
BACKGROUND:   The cause of follicular occlusion, a key early event in the pathogenesis of hidradenitis suppurativa (HS), also known as acne inversa, remains unknown. OBJECTIVES: To identify changes, if any, in the antimicrobial peptide (AMP) and cytokine expression profile of HS affected human skin. METHODS: Quantitative immunohistomorphometry was used to compare the in situ protein expression of selected AMPs and cytokines in lesional HS skin from 18 patients with that in healthy skin (n = 12). The lesional skin from patients with HS was histologically subclassified based on the predominance of inflammation vs. scarring. RESULTS: Compared with healthy controls, significantly increased immunoreactivity for cathelicidin (LL-37) was noted in the apocrine sweat gland and distal outer root sheath (ORS) of the hair follicle (HF) epithelium in lesional HS skin. Immunoreactivity for LL-37, psoriasin, human β-defensin 3 (hBD3), α-melanocyte stimulating hormone (α-MSH), macrophage migration inhibitory factor (MIF), tumour necrosis factor (TNF)-α and interleukin (IL)-8 was significantly increased in HS epidermis. LL-37 and TNF-α immunoreactivity was also increased in the dermis of lesional HS skin. In contrast, lysozyme expression was decreased in the epidermis of lesional HS skin, while that of TNF-α and IL-8 was decreased in the proximal ORS of HFs in HS lesions. These differences were most pronounced in HS with predominant inflammation. CONCLUSIONS:   Our observations raise the question as to whether excessive secretion of AMPs by the skin, in particular by the apocrine sweat glands, distal HF epithelium, and epidermis, may attract inflammation and thus facilitate or promote HS development.
-------------------------------------

10004006_234 - 0.714395686326 - science
[pain, cwp, variant, genetic, association]

Genome-wide association study meta-analysis of chronic widespread pain: evidence for involvement of the 5p15.2 region.
BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Chronic widespread pain (CWP) is a common disorder affecting ∼10% of the general population and has an estimated heritability of 48-52%. In the first large-scale genome-wide association study (GWAS) meta-analysis, we aimed to identify common genetic variants associated with CWP. METHODS: We conducted a GWAS meta-analysis in 1308 female CWP cases and 5791 controls of European descent, and replicated the effects of the genetic variants with suggestive evidence for association in 1480 CWP cases and 7989 controls. Subsequently, we studied gene expression levels of the nearest genes in two chronic inflammatory pain mouse models, and examined 92 genetic variants previously described associated with pain. RESULTS: The minor C-allele of rs13361160 on chromosome 5p15.2, located upstream of chaperonin-containing-TCP1-complex-5 gene (CCT5) and downstream of FAM173B, was found to be associated with a 30% higher risk of CWP (minor allele frequency=43%; OR=1.30, 95% CI 1.19 to 1.42, p=1.2×10(-8)). Combined with the replication, we observed a slightly attenuated OR of 1.17 (95% CI 1.10 to 1.24, p=4.7×10(-7)) with moderate heterogeneity (I2=28.4%). However, in a sensitivity analysis that only allowed studies with joint-specific pain, the combined association was genome-wide significant (OR=1.23, 95% CI 1.14 to 1.32, p=3.4×10(-8), I2=0%). Expression levels of Cct5 and Fam173b in mice with inflammatory pain were higher in the lumbar spinal cord, not in the lumbar dorsal root ganglions, compared to mice without pain. None of the 92 genetic variants previously described were significantly associated with pain (p>7.7×10(-4)). CONCLUSIONS: We identified a common genetic variant on chromosome 5p15.2 associated with joint-specific CWP in humans. This work suggests that CCT5 and FAM173B are promising targets in the regulation of pain.
-------------------------------------

10007519_234 - 0.904611647036 - medicine
[gefitinib, egfr, patient, nsclc, chemotherapy, study]

Gefitinib for the treatment of non-small-cell lung cancer.
IMPORTANCE OF THE FIELD: The epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is a leading target for treatment of non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Recent trials of the small-molecule EGFR inhibitor gefitinib have now more clearly defined indications for usage, and clinical and molecular factors predictive of benefit. AREAS COVERED IN THIS REVIEW: A systematic search of the literature (Medline, ASCO, WCLC meeting abstracts) was performed from January 2000 to January 2010. The Phase III INTEREST study found gefitinib in unselected, pretreated patients was not inferior to docetaxel chemotherapy in overall survival, offering improved quality of life and superior toxicity profile. The Phase III IPASS study demonstrated improved progression-free survival with gefitinib compared with paclitaxel-carboplatin chemotherapy in chemotherapy-naive, never/light ex-smokers with adenocarcinoma histology. Stratifying for EGFR mutation revealed mutation-positive patients had superior outcomes with gefitinib compared with chemotherapy. Subsequent studies (WJOG4305, NEJ002), selecting only EGFR mutation-positive patients prospectively confirm this finding. WHAT THE READER WILL GAIN: The profile of gefitinib and landmark trials in NSCLC are summarized. How biomarkers may further optimize therapeutic benefit is highlighted. TAKE HOME MESSAGE: Gefitinib is expected to have an important impact on management of pretreated and selected chemotherapy-naive patients with advanced NSCLC. In addition, activating EGFR mutations are proven to be of value for prediction of those who will derive most benefit.
-------------------------------------

10018344_234 - 0.901617606463 - science
[pathway, innate, classical, bacterial, immunity, complement, response, component, pathogen, igm]

The classical pathway is the dominant complement pathway required for innate immunity to Streptococcus pneumoniae infection in mice.
The complement system is an important component of the innate immune response to bacterial pathogens, including Streptococcus pneumoniae. The classical complement pathway is activated by antibody-antigen complexes on the bacterial surface and has been considered predominately to be an effector of the adaptive immune response, whereas the alternative and mannose-binding lectin pathways are activated directly by bacterial cell surface components and are considered effectors of the innate immune response. Recently, a role has been suggested for the classical pathway during innate immunity that is activated by natural IgM or components of the acute-phase response bound to bacterial pathogens. However, the functional importance of the classical pathway for innate immunity to S. pneumoniae and other bacterial pathogens, and its relative contribution compared with the alternative and mannose-binding lectin pathways has not been defined. By using strains of mice with genetic deficiencies of complement components and secretory IgM we have investigated the role of each complement pathway and natural IgM for innate immunity to S. pneumoniae. Our results show that the proportion of a population of S. pneumoniae bound by C3 depends mainly on the classical pathway, whereas the intensity of C3 binding depends on the alternative pathway. Furthermore, the classical pathway, partially targeted by the binding of natural IgM to bacteria, is the dominant pathway for activation of the complement system during innate immunity to S. pneumoniae, loss of which results in rapidly progressing septicemia and impaired macrophage activation. These data demonstrate the vital role of the classical pathway for innate immunity to a bacterial pathogen.
-------------------------------------

10007015_234 - 0.782016689994 - science
[particle, size, primary, model, bl, aerosol, uncertainty]

Primary versus secondary contributions to particle number concentrations in the European boundary layer
It is important to understand the relative contribution of primary and secondary particles to regional and global aerosol so that models can attribute aerosol radiative forcing to different sources. In large-scale models, there is considerable uncertainty associated with treatments of particle formation (nucleation) in the boundary layer (BL) and in the size distribution of emitted primary particles, leading to uncertainties in predicted cloud condensation nuclei (CCN) concentrations. Here we quantify how primary particle emissions and secondary particle formation influence size-resolved particle number concentrations in the BL using a global aerosol microphysics model and aircraft and ground site observations made during the May 2008 campaign of the European Integrated Project on Aerosol Cloud Climate Air Quality Interactions (EUCAARI). We tested four different parameterisations for BL nucleation and two assumptions for the emission size distribution of anthropogenic and wildfire carbonaceous particles. When we emit carbonaceous particles at small sizes (as recommended by the Aerosol Inter-comparison project, AEROCOM), the spatial distributions of campaign-mean number concentrations of particles with diameter >50 nm (N-50) and >100 nm (N-100) were well captured by the model (R-2 >= 0.8) and the normalised mean bias (NMB) was also small (-18\% for N-50 and -1\% for N-100). Emission of carbonaceous particles at larger sizes, which we consider to be more realistic for low spatial resolution global models, results in equally good correlation but larger bias (R-2 >= 0.8, NMB = -52\% and -29\%), which could be partly but not entirely compensated by BL nucleation. Within the uncertainty of the observations and accounting for the uncertainty in the size of emitted primary particles, BL nucleation makes a statistically significant contribution to CCN-sized particles at less than a quarter of the ground sites. Our results show that a major source of uncertainty in CCN-sized particles in polluted European air is the emitted size of primary carbonaceous particles. New information is required not just from direct observations, but also to determine the ``effective emission size{''} and composition of primary particles appropriate for different resolution models.
-------------------------------------

10007632_234 - 0.891959402834 - science
[photoageing, consequence, protein, extracellular, ultraviolet, skin, differential]

Chemical consequences of cutaneous photoageing
Human skin, in common with other organs, ages as a consequence of the passage of time, but in areas exposed to solar ultraviolet radiation, the effects of this intrinsic ageing process are exacerbated. In particular, both the severity and speed of onset of age-related changes, such as wrinkle formation and loss of elasticity, are enhanced in photoaged (also termed extrinsically aged) as compared with aged, photoprotected, skin. The anatomy of skin is characterised by two major layers: an outer, avascular, yet highly cellular and dynamic epidermis and an underlying vascularised, comparatively static and cell-poor, dermis. The structural consequences of photoageing are mainly evident in the extracellular matrix-rich but cell-poor dermis where key extracellular matrix proteins are particularly susceptible to photodamage. Most investigations to date have concentrated on the cell as both a target for and mediator of, ultraviolet radiation-induced photoageing. As the main effectors of dermal remodelling produced by cells (extracellular proteases) generally have low substrate specificity, we recently suggested that the differential susceptibility of key extracellular matrix proteins to the processes of photoageing may be due to direct, as opposed to cell-mediated, photodamage. In this review, we discuss the experimental evidence for ultraviolet radiation (and related reactive oxygen species)mediated differential degradation of normally long lived dermal proteins including the fibrillar collagens, elastic fibre components, glycoproteins and proteoglycans. Whilst these components exhibit highly diverse primary and hence macro-and supra-molecular structures, we present evidence that amino acid composition alone may be a useful predictor of age-related protein degradation in both photoexposed and, as a consequence of differential oxidation sensitivity, photoprotected, tissues.
-------------------------------------

10018301_234 - 0.873664702697 - science
[response, cell, flagellin, lung, tlr5, radioresistant, tlr4, immune, respiratory, innate]

Radioresistant cells expressing TLR5 control the respiratory epithelium's innate immune responses to flagellin.
Bacterial products (such as endotoxins and flagellin) trigger innate immune responses through TLRs. Flagellin-induced signalling involves TLR5 and MyD88 and, according to some reports, TLR4. Whereas epithelial and dendritic cells are stimulated by flagellin in vitro, the cell contribution to the in vivo response is still unclear. Here, we studied the respective roles of radioresistant and radiosensitive cells in flagellin-induced airway inflammation in mice. We found that i.n. delivery of flagellin elicits a transient change in respiratory function and an acute, pro-inflammatory response in the lungs, characterized by TLR5- and MyD88-dependent chemokine secretion and neutrophil recruitment. In contrast, TLR4, CD14 and TRIF were not essential for flagellin-mediated responses, indicating that TLR4 does not cooperate with TLR5 in the lungs. Respiratory function, chemokine secretion and airway infiltration by neutrophils were dependent on radioresistant, TLR5-expressing cells. Furthermore, lung haematopoietic cells also responded to flagellin by activating TNF-alpha production. We suggest that the radioresistant lung epithelial cells are essential for initiating early, TLR5-dependent signalling in response to flagellin and thus triggering the lung's innate immune responses.
-------------------------------------

10011959_234 - 0.827838045189 - science
[hdac, brain, ffaha, imaging]

Imaging epigenetic regulation by histone deacetylases in the brain using PET/MRI with 18F-FAHA.
Epigenetic modifications mediated by histone deacetylases (HDACs) play important roles in the mechanisms of different neurologic diseases and HDAC inhibitors (HDACIs) have shown promise in therapy. However, pharmacodynamic profiles of many HDACIs in the brain remain largely unknown due to the lack of validated methods for noninvasive imaging of HDAC expression-activity. In this study, dynamic PET/CT imaging was performed in 4 rhesus macaques using (18)FFAHA, a novel HDAC substrate, and (18)Ffluoroacetate, the major radio-metabolite of (18)FFAHA, and fused with corresponding MR images of the brain. Quantification of (18)FFAHA accumulation in the brain was performed using a customized dual-tracer pharmacokinetic model. Immunohistochemical analyses of brain tissue revealed the heterogeneity of expression of individual HDACs in different brain structures and cell types and confirmed that PET/CT/MRI with (18)FFAHA reflects the level of expression-activity of HDAC class IIa enzymes. Furthermore, PET/CT/MRI with (18)FFAHA enabled non-invasive, quantitative assessment of pharmacodynamics of HDAC inhibitor SAHA in the brain.
-------------------------------------

10005198_234 - 0.951458099353 - science
[excimer, molecule, superfluid, temperature]

Observation of Crossover from Ballistic to Diffusion Regime for Excimer Molecules in Superfluid 4He
We have measured the temperature dependence of the time of flight of helium excimer molecules in superfluid 4He and find that the molecules behave ballistically below ∼100 mK and exhibit Brownian motion above ∼200 mK. In the intermediate temperature range the transport cannot be described by either of the models.
-------------------------------------

10016988_234 - 0.782968408127 - science
[itch, temporal, signal, gyrus, study]

A temporal analysis of the central neural processing of itch.
BACKGROUND: Pruritus, or itch, is the most prevalent symptom of allergic and inflammatory skin disease. Although it is known that itch induces activation of a neural network in the brain, the temporal dynamics of the network as well as the pathophysiology and neurobiology are not well understood. OBJECTIVES: The study aimed to elucidate (i) the temporal dynamics of the itch response identified in earlier studies and (ii) the relationship between central and subjective responses to itch. METHODS: Using a novel time-series analysis, we performed a double-blind, placebo-controlled, randomized, within-subject functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) study of the cerebral processing of histamine-induced itch in healthy volunteers (n = 16) by tracking the 8-min period following a single skin prick. RESULTS: Histamine-induced itch compared with saline resulted in significant area under the curve blood oxygen level dependent (BOLD) signal changes in the middle/superior temporal gyrus and right inferior frontal gyrus/insula. We observed negative itch-induced BOLD signal changes compared with saline in (i) the pregenual anterior cingulate cortex (ACC)/medial frontal gyrus, (ii) subgenual ACC/ventral striatum, (iii) bilateral temporal pole/parahippocampal gyrus and (iv) several regions within the cerebellum. We noted a trend significance in the left precentral gyrus part of the motor cortex. The BOLD signal change in several of these regions correlated with perception of itch intensity. CONCLUSIONS: In contrast to other fMRI studies we observed a multifocal negative signal. An improved understanding of both activated and deactivated brain regions during the itch response may in the long term facilitate development of more effective management strategies.
-------------------------------------

10003280_234 - 0.859404590908 - science
[hair, ftir, tissue, follicle]

Visualization and characterisation of defined hair follicle compartments by Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) imaging without labelling.
BACKGROUND: To visualise and characterise skin architecture, the tissue usually has to be destroyed and labelled. OBJECTIVES: The use of Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy as a label-free, minimally sample destructive method to define hair follicular structure has been explored and demonstrated in this paper. METHODS: Human scalp skin cryosections were imaged using FTIR microscopy and the data was subsequently analysed with N-FINDR spectral unmixing algorithm. RESULTS: This resulted in an excellent distinction of known hair follicle tissue layers, which could be discerned based on their molecular structure. CONCLUSION: The development of a minimally sample-destructive, label-free spectroscopy based technique that can differentiate layers of cells in the dermal papilla and connective tissue sheath in the mesenchyme of the hair follicle paves the way forward to identifying spectral markers important in wound healing and stem cell therapies.
-------------------------------------

10017923_234 - 0.927040943074 - science
[microfibril, uvb, fibrillin, flexion, mmp-3, irradiation, exposure, degradation, angle]

A common pathway for age-related protein oxidation and photoageing
Remodelling of extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins as a result of solar ultraviolet radiation (UVR) exposure plays a key role in skin photoageing. We have recently demonstrated that UVR-chromophore-rich fibrillin microfibrils undergo photodegradation following UV irradiation in a cell-free environment. In this study, we test the hypotheses that fibrillin microfibril degradation following UVR exposure: i) occurs via the photodynamic production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and; ii) alters the susceptibility of resultant microfibril photoproducts to protease-mediated degradation.   Fibrillin microfibrils were isolated from cultured human dermal fibroblasts. Microfibril structure after UVB irradiation (Phillips TL-12 source; 500mJ/cm2) in ambient and O2-depleted conditions or after treatment with H2O2 (40mM; up to 2hrs) was quantified by atomic force microscopy (AFM). The effect of UVB irradiation (50mJ/cm2) on the susceptibility of microfibrils to MMP-3 proteolysis was also quantified by AFM.   In ambient oxygen, UVB irradiation caused a dose-dependent decrease in median fibrillin microfibril flexion angle. However, in an O2-depleted environment the UVB mediated effects were significantly abrogated. Structural changes were mimicked by exposure to H2O2.    Individually, UVB or MMP-3 significantly decreased the median microfibril flexion angle. However, addition of MMP-3 to UVB irradiated microfibrils appeared to selectively degrade low flexion angle fibrillin microfibrils leaving a population with a median flexion angle that was not significantly different to the controls.   These observations suggest that UVB degradation involves the photodynamic formation of ROS and that exposure to H2O2 can mimic the effects of UVB degradation. Furthermore, MMP-3 appears to selectively degrade UVB-damaged fibrillin microfibrils in vitro
-------------------------------------

10016817_234 - 0.843965567538 - science
[gene, cluster, balhimycin, biosynthesis, sequence, bbr]

The border sequence of the balhimycin biosynthesis gene cluster from Amycolatopsis balhimycina contains bbr, encoding a StrR-like pathway-specific regulator
Balhimycin, produced by the actinomycete Amycolatopsis balhimycina DSM5908, is a glycopeptide antibiotic highly similar to vancomycin, the antibiotic of 'last resort' used for the treatment of resistant Gram-positive pathogenic bacteria. Partial sequence of the balhimycin biosynthesis gene cluster was previously reported. In this work, cosmids which overlap the region of the characterized gene cluster were isolated and sequenced. At the 'left' end of the cluster, genes were identified which are involved in balhimycin biosynthesis, transport, resistance and regulation. The 'right' end border is defined by a putative 3-deoxy-D-arabino-heptulosonate 7-phosphate synthase (dahp) gene. The proximate gene is similar to a type I polyketide synthase gene of the rifamycin producer Amycolatopsis mediterranei indicating that another biosynthesis gene cluster might be located directly next to the balhimycin gene cluster. The newly identified StrR-like pathway-specific regulator, Bbr, was characterized to be a DNA-binding protein and may have a role in balhimycin biosynthesis. Purified N-terminally His-tagged Bbr shows specific DNA-binding to five promoter regions within the gene cluster. By in silico analysis and by comparison of the DNA sequences binding Bbr, conserved inverted repeat sequences for the Bbr-binding site are proposed. The putative Bbr consensus sequence differs from that published for StrR. Copyright ?? 2007 S. Karger AG.
-------------------------------------

10008653_234 - 0.855526012773 - science
[times, competition, gene, molecular, expression, cited, networks, flux]

How Molecular Competition Influences Fluxes in Gene Expression Networks
Times Cited: 2
-------------------------------------

10009691_234 - 0.839403138458 - medicine
[tumour, diagnosis, symptom, time, england, west, month, interval, year, north]

A comparison of trends in symptom interval for Low Grade Gliomas, Ependymomas, PNETs, Craniopharyngiomas and Rare tumour types in the North West region of England between the years 1954-2008
Introduction: Co-incidental with the launch of the ‘Head Smart’ campaign in the UK, we have benchmarked the presenting symptom interval to diagnosis for childhood brain tumours in the North West of England for a 55 year time period.Methods: The case notes and NW Children’s Cancer Registry records of patients diagnosed with the above tumour types between years 1954-2008 in the North West Region of England were investigated.  Results:  For children with LGG (n=554) the availability of the CT and then MRI scan was associated with a reduction in the symptom interval to diagnosis from approximately 10 months before 1975 (CT introduced), to a steady 5 months in the more modern treatment eras. In comparison, the time to diagnosis for ependymoma (n= 129) has remained steady at 1.7 – 2.4 months for the study period, and approximately 55% of children with PNET (n = 220) have been diagnosed within 6 weeks of first symptom since the mid 1960’s.   However, there has been a significant increase in the number of patients presenting within 6 weeks the craniopharyngioma (n = 82) and rare tumour groups (n = 251), particularly choroid plexus tumours in the CT/MRI scan eras. Conclusion:  Advances in neuro-imaging have been associated with reductions in the median time to diagnosis from first symptom for some, but not all brain tumours of childhood.  The challenge to reduce the median time to diagnosis < 6 weeks needs to be met for all tumour types in the NW of England.
-------------------------------------

10005687_234 - 0.831709543559 - medicine
[disease, patient]

Diagnosis of Crohn's disease.
A study has been made of diagnostic errors and delays in 140 patients with Crohn's disease. Results were correlated with the site of the disease. Only 13% of patients with small-bowel disease and 21% of the group as a whole were correctly diagnosed after initial investigation. A large number of misdiagnoses were made, and these were often multiple. Of patients with small-bowel disease, 19% were first thought to be suffering from a psychiatric disorder.
-------------------------------------

10010308_234 - 0.88099796512 - science
[metabolism, analysis]

Metabolomic analysis of a synthetic metabolic switch in Streptomyces coelicolor A3(2)
The global analysis of metabolism by liquid chromatography coupled to mass spectrometry is often hampered by a large amount of biological and technical variability. Here, we introduce an experimental and analytical strategy that can produce robust metabolome profiles in the face of this challenge. By applying a new computational approach based on concordance analysis to an extremely large number of analytical replicates, we are able to show that the overexpression of an antisense non-coding {RNA} targeting glutamine synthetase I results in a major reorganization of the metabolism of Streptomyces coelicolor, the model species of antibiotic-producing bacteria. We identified 97 metabolites with statistically significant reproducible dynamic behavior across the time series. The observed metabolic changes are very rapid, specific and widespread across metabolism, but focus on the nitrogen assimilation pathways. Our results demonstrate the power of highly replicated experimental designs for the robust characterization of metabolite dynamics. The identified global rearrangement of metabolism suggests the usefulness of {RNA} interference as an efficient strategy to manipulate the physiology of bacteria with wider biotechnological applicability in microorganisms. ?? 2011 {WILEY-VCH} Verlag {GmbH} \& Co. {KGaA}, Weinheim.
-------------------------------------

10007230_234 - 0.85733036112 - science
[mutation, atrial, s140g, excitation, kcnq1, rate, fibrillation]

Pro-arrhythmogenic effects of the S140G KCNQ1 mutation in human atrial fibrillation - insights from modelling.
Key points  A previous study has identified a gene mutation (KCNQ1 S140G) in some patients with a familial form of atrial fibrillation, one of the most common cardiac rhythm disturbances causing morbidity and mortality. A causal link between the mutation and genesis of atrial fibrillation has not yet been directly demonstrated.  Increased I(Ks) arising from the KCNQ1 S140G mutation abbreviated atrial action potential duration (APD) and effective refractory period (ERP) and flattened APD and ERP restitution curves. It reduced atrial conduction velocity at low excitation rates, but increased it at high excitation rates that facilitated the conduction of high rate atrial excitation waves.  The mutation increased tissue susceptibility for initiation and maintenance of atrial arrhythmias.  The mutation stabilizes and accelerates re-entrant excitation waves, leading to rapid and sustained re-entry.  This study provides novel insights towards understanding the mechanisms underlying the pro-arrhythmic effects of the KCNQ1 S140G mutation.
-------------------------------------

10009735_234 - 0.756809190739 - science
[isolate, virulence, ld50, factor, mouse, day]

Cryptococcus neoformans var. grubii isolates recovered from persons with AIDS demonstrate a wide range of virulence during murine meningoencephalitis that correlates with the expression of certain virulence factors.
Cryptococcus neoformans is a common cause of meningoencephalitis among AIDS patients. Several C. neoformans virulence factors have been identified, but the relative importance of particular factors is unknown. This study examined the correlation of the virulence of 18 C. neoformans var. grubii isolates from AIDS patients with the expression of several well-described virulence factors. The LD50 at 15 days after intracranial inoculation of ICR mice was <100 c.f.u. for 22 % of isolates, 100-1000 for 28 %, 1000-10,000 for 11 % and >20,000 for 39 %. Higher cryptococcal concentrations in brains were noted for isolates with lower LD50 (P = 0.002). In survival studies, no immunocompetent BALB/c mice (nu/-) infected with 3 x LD50 of three virulent isolates (LD50 = 62, 99, 1280) survived beyond 23 days, whereas 100 %, 90 % and 90 % of mice infected with 20,000 c.f.u. of three hypovirulent isolates (LD50 > 20,000) survived for 60 days (P < 0.0001). Even among BALB/c nude (nu/nu) mice, survival rates over 60 days were 100 %, 70 % and 50 %, respectively, for the hypovirulent isolates. Growth rate at 37 degrees C and capsule size within brains correlated with LD50 by univariate (P = 0.0001 and 0.028, respectively) and multivariate (P = 0.017 and 0.016, respectively) analyses. There was no correlation between LD50 and capsule size in vitro, phospholipase activity, melanin formation, proteinase activity and fluconazole MIC. In conclusion, AIDS patients are susceptible to infection by C. neoformans isolates of wide-ranging virulence, including isolates that are markedly hypovirulent. The virulence of a given isolate reflects a composite of factors rather than the contribution of a dominant factor. Growth at 37 degrees C and capsule size in vivo make particularly important contributions.
-------------------------------------

10006824_234 - 0.706849767456 - science
[pulsar, modulation, energy, state]

The High Time Resolution Universe Pulsar Survey - V. Single-pulse energetics and modulation properties of 315 pulsars
We report on the pulse-to-pulse energy distributions and phase-resolved modulation properties for catalogued pulsars in the southern High Time Resolution Universe intermediate-latitude survey. We selected the 315 pulsars detected in a single-pulse search of this survey, allowing a large sample unbiased regarding any rotational parameters of neutron stars. We found that the energy distribution of many pulsars is well described by a log-normal distribution, with few deviating from a small range in log-normal scale and location parameters. Some pulsars exhibited multiple energy states corresponding to mode changes, and implying that some observed ???nulling??? may actually be a mode-change effect. PSR J1900-2600 was found to emit weakly in its previously identified ???null??? state. We found evidence for another state-change effect in two pulsars, which show bimodality in their nulling time-scales; that is, they switch between a continuous-emission state and a single-pulse-emitting state. Large modulation occurs in many pulsars across the full integrated profile, with increased sporadic bursts at leading and trailing sub-beam edges. Some of these high-energy outbursts may indicate the presence of ???giant pulse??? phenomena. We found no correlation with modulation and pulsar period, age or other parameters. Finally, the deviation of integrated pulse energy from its average value was generally quite small, despite the significant phase-resolved modulation in some pulsars; we interpret this as tenuous evidence of energy regulation between distinct pulsar sub-beams.
-------------------------------------

10002303_234 - 0.922290795734 - education
[school, academic, attainment, need, student, level]

The role of school and individual differences in the academic attainment of learners with special educational needs and disabilities: a multi-level analysis.
Students with special educational needs and disabilities (SEND) are at a greatly increased risk of poor academic outcomes. Understanding the factors that influence their attainment is a crucial first step towards developing more effective provision. In the current study we present a multi-level, natural variation analysis which highlights important determinants at school and individual levels in two core academic subjects (English and Maths) using a nationally representative sample of over 15,000 students with SEND attending more than 400 schools across England. We found that at the school level, inclusivity, attainment, free school meal (FSM) eligibility, behaviour (in primary schools) and linguistic diversity (secondary schools), and at the student level, age, sex, FSM eligibility, SEND provision, SEND primary need, attendance, behaviour and positive relationships each contributed to the distribution of academic attainment. Implications of these findings are discussed and study limitations are noted.
-------------------------------------

10018172_234 - 0.93155117756 - science
[biomarker, methane, sediment, bacterium, site, flux, archaeal, diffusive, archaea]

Biomarker indicators for anaerobic oxidizers of methane in brackish-marine sediments with diffusive methane fluxes
The anaerobic oxidation of methane (AOM) is a major methane sink in marine sediments and plays a crucial role in mitigating methane fluxes to the overlying water column. We investigated biomarker distributions and compound specific isotopic signatures in sediments from sites on the Northern European continental margin that are characterized by a diffusive flux of methane At all sites, the organic matter (OM) is predominantly derived from terrestrial higher plants, with subordinate abundances of algal biomarkers, but biomarkers for archaea and bacteria are also present. The co-occurrence of the archaeal lipids archaeol, sn-2-hydroxyarchaeol and 2,6,10,15,19-pentamethylicosane (PMI) with non-isoprenoidal glycerol diethers inferred to derive from sulfate-reducing bacteria (SRB) is similar to microbial biomarker assemblages observed at cold seeps. The archaeal and inferred SRB biomarker concentrations typically reach maxima close to the sulfate-methane transition zone (SMTZ), where archaeal biomarkers are depleted in C-13 The 16S rRNA gene sequences from the SMTZ of the Aarhus Bay sediment core indicate the occurrence of ANME-1 archaea, consistent with inferences derived from biomarker distributions The observations suggest that AOM in these diffusive settings is mediated by consortia of archaea and bacteria similar to those found at many seep and methane hydrate sites around the world. (C) 2009 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
-------------------------------------

10003654_234 - 0.848793456451 - medicine
[stroke, community, patient, nursing, carer]

Community nursing and stroke: a reassessment of the issues.
Recent research has highlighted the difficulties that stroke patients and carers experience in navigating a recovery path through a complex array of service providers. Many of these difficulties relate to continuing recovery from stroke at home, often when professional help is decreasing. A study by Gibbon (1994) demonstrated a potential role for community nurses in helping patients and carers to cope with the aftermath of stroke. This article reassesses the issues that affect the capacity of community nurses to develop this role. A focus group conducted with community nursing students identified a number of barriers to the expansion of service provision for this patient group, including workload pressures, training and management support. Understanding of the problems faced by stroke patients and their carers in the current organization of continuing care and rehabilitation is required to support expansion of nursing practice in this area.
-------------------------------------

10003999_234 - 0.719090994392 - technology_and_computing
[model, network, computational]

Creating, documenting and sharing network models.
As computational neuroscience matures, many simulation environments are available that are useful for neuronal network modeling. However, methods for successfully documenting models for publication and for exchanging models and model components among these projects are still under development. Here we briefly review existing software and applications for network model creation, documentation and exchange. Then we discuss a few of the larger issues facing the field of computational neuroscience regarding network modeling and suggest solutions to some of these problems, concentrating in particular on standardized network model terminology, notation, and descriptions and explicit documentation of model scaling. We hope this will enable and encourage computational neuroscientists to share their models more systematically in the future.
-------------------------------------

10008168_234 - 0.760919950199 - science
[schizotypy, effect, study, biomarker, group, n-back, cognitive, amisulpride, memory, high]

A validation of cognitive biomarkers for the early identification of cognitive enhancing agents in schizotypy: a three-center double-blind placebo-controlled study.
A number of compounds aimed at improving cognition in schizophrenia have failed to demonstrate efficacy in Phase 2 clinical trials. Translational studies using biomarkers in surrogate populations, such as schizotypy, could be used to assess the efficacy of novel compounds. In this study, we aimed to validate the sensitivity and inter-site reliability of cognitive biomarkers (working memory (N-back), spatial working memory (SWM) and verbal fluency (VF) tasks) to detect the schizotypy phenotype and its reversal by psychotropic drugs. Healthy volunteers scoring high or average on a schizotypal personality measure (122 in each group) were randomized to receive a single dose of risperidone, amisulpride, nicotine or placebo in a double-blind, between-subject design. We found evidence for a poorer performance on N-back and VF tasks in the high schizotypy group, replicating previous research. This effect was counteracted by amisulpride on N-back: it improved working memory in high schizotypy group but impaired the controls. A similar pattern was seen in SWM and VF. We interpret this finding in the light of the dopamine enhancing action of amisulpride when given in low doses. In contrast, risperidone impaired both groups and nicotine had a beneficial effect for the low baseline performers only. These effects were consistent across sites. These data demonstrates the utility of biomarkers in detecting the effect of schizotypy and its reversal by drugs that enhance dopamine and cholinergic function. Studies using similar design could help the early assessment of potential of compounds designed to improve cognition in schizophrenia.
-------------------------------------

10005557_234 - 0.841196398931 - science
[aspergillus, sample, mycassay, tissue]

Detection of Aspergillus in lung and other tissue samples using the MycAssay Aspergillus real-time PCR kit.
The MycAssay™ Aspergillus real-time PCR kit was tested on tissues from patients with invasive fungal infections. Tissue samples from nine organ transplant recipients and 33 patients with haematological malignancy were from lung (n = 30), skin (n = 4), and others. Samples were preprocessed with proteinase K and lyticase, followed by DNA extraction and real-time PCR. For all samples, the sensitivity of the MycAssay Aspergillus test was 82% and specificity 79% relative to microscopy and 90% and 64%, respectively, compared with Aspergillus culture. The positive predictive value and negative predictive values compared with culture were 69% and 88% and were 88% and 69% compared with microscopy, respectively. The MycAssay Aspergillus test detected tissue invasive infections with Aspergillus fumigatus , Aspergillus flavus , and Aspergillus terreus.
-------------------------------------

10010349_234 - 0.749784021322 - science
[mutagenesis, rational, random, engineering]

The future of industrial antibiotic production: From random mutagenesis to synthetic biology
atural products derived from the secondary metabolism of microbes constitute a cornerstone of modern medicine. Engineering bugs to produce these products in high quantities is a major challenge for biotechnology, which has usually been tackled by either one of two strategies: iterative random mutagenesis or rational design. Recently, we analyzed the transcriptome of a Streptomyces clavuligerus strain optimized for production of the ??-lactamase inhibitor clavulanic acid by multiple rounds of mutagenesis and selection, and discovered that the observed changes matched surprisingly well with simple changes that have been introduced into these strains by rational engineering. Here, we discuss how in the new field of synthetic biology, random mutagenesis and rational engineering can be implemented complementarily in ways which may enable one to go beyond the status quo that has now been reached by each method independently. ?? 2011 Landes Bioscience.
-------------------------------------

10007488_234 - 0.953431088389 - medicine
[patient, symptom, care, cancer, management, lung, novel, intervention, npus, health]

Considerations in developing and delivering a non-pharmacological intervention for symptom management in lung cancer: the views of health care professionals.
BACKGROUND: A respiratory distress symptom cluster has recently been identified in lung cancer associated with breathlessness, cough and fatigue, and the study reported here is part of a wider body of work being undertaken to develop a novel non-pharmacological intervention (NPI) for the management of this symptom cluster. The current paper reports the views of health care professionals (HCPs) involved with cancer care regarding the most appropriate ways of developing and delivering such a novel intervention. METHODS: Five focus groups, supplemented with additional telephone interviews, were conducted with a range of both community- and acute-based HCPs involved in symptom management for lung cancer patients. Participants included oncologists, palliative care consultants, specialist nurses, occupational therapists and physiotherapists. The focus groups were transcribed verbatim and analysed using NVIVO to support a framework analysis approach. RESULTS: The current delivery of NPIs was found to be ad hoc and varied between sites both in terms of what was delivered and by which health care professionals. The provision of NPIs within acute medical settings faced common problems concerning staffing time and space, and there was a recognition that the preference of most patients to make as few hospital visits as possible also complicated NPI teaching. Moreover, there may only be a small window of opportunity in which to effectively teach lung cancer patients a novel NPI as the period between diagnosis and the onset of severe symptoms is often short. DISCUSSION: The participants agreed that the novel symptom management NPI should be individually personalised to the needs of each patient and be available for patients when they become receptive to it. Moreover, they agreed that the intervention would be most effective if delivered to patients individually rather than in groups, outside acute medical settings where possible and closer to patient's homes, should be delivered by an HCP rather than a trained volunteer or lay person and should involve informal carers wherever practicable.
-------------------------------------

10001968_234 - 0.73312620413 - education
[non-stationary, diversity, learning, concept, ensemble]

Theoretical and Empirical Analysis of Diversity in Non-Stationary Learning
In non-stationary learning, we require a predictive model to learn over time, adapting to changes in the concept if necessary. A major concern in any algorithm for non-stationary learning is its rate of adaptation to new concepts. When tackling such problems with ensembles, the concept of \emph{diversity} appears to be of significance. In this paper, we discuss how we expect diversity to impact the rate of adaptation in non-stationary ensemble learning. We then analyse the relation between voting margins and a popular measure of diversity, KW variance, and use the similarities between them to draw some useful conclusions regarding ensemble adaptivity.
-------------------------------------

10007445_234 - 0.801548198734 - science
[mkk4, map2k4, tumor, lung, kinase, cell, invasion, adenocarcinoma, suppressor, expression]

Map2k4 functions as a tumor suppressor in lung adenocarcinoma and inhibits tumor cell invasion by decreasing peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor γ2 expression.
MAP2K4 encodes a dual-specificity kinase (mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase 4, or MKK4) that is mutated in a variety of human malignancies, but the biochemical properties of the mutant kinases and their roles in tumorigenesis have not been fully elucidated. Here we showed that 8 out of 11 cancer-associated MAP2K4 mutations reduce MKK4 protein stability or impair its kinase activity. On the basis of findings from bioinformatic studies on human cancer cell lines with homozygous MAP2K4 loss, we posited that MKK4 functions as a tumor suppressor in lung adenocarcinomas that develop in mice owing to expression of mutant Kras and Tp53. Conditional Map2k4 inactivation in the bronchial epithelium of mice had no discernible effect alone but increased the multiplicity and accelerated the growth of incipient lung neoplasias induced by oncogenic Kras. MKK4 suppressed the invasion and metastasis of Kras-Tp53-mutant lung adenocarcinoma cells. MKK4 deficiency increased peroxisomal proliferator-activated receptor γ2 (PPARγ2) expression through noncanonical MKK4 substrates, and PPARγ2 enhanced tumor cell invasion. We conclude that Map2k4 functions as a tumor suppressor in lung adenocarcinoma and inhibits tumor cell invasion by decreasing PPARγ2 levels.
-------------------------------------

10018318_234 - 0.899622268402 - science
[immune, bacterial, innate, cd200r, mouse, influenza, infection, virus, cell, cd200]

Lowering the threshold of lung innate immune cell activation alters susceptibility to secondary bacterial superinfection.
BACKGROUND: Previous studies have shown that the interaction of CD200R, a myeloid inhibitory receptor, with its ligand, CD200, is critical in the control of innate immune activation in the lung. METHODS AND RESULTS: Using a mouse model of bacterial superinfection following influenza, we show that an absence of CD200R (a negative regulator highly expressed by macrophages and dendritic cells), restricts commensal and exogenous bacterial invasiveness and completely prevents the mortality observed in wild-type mice. This benefit is due to a heightened innate immune response to influenza virus in cd200r knockout mice that limits immune pathogenesis and viral load. In wild-type mice, apoptotic cells expressing CD200 that we believe contribute to the suppressed innate immune response to bacteria dominate during the resolution phase of influenza-induced inflammation. We also show for the first time the presence of a variety of previously unidentified bacterial species in the lower airways that are significantly adjusted by influenza virus infection and may contribute to the pathophysiology of disease. CONCLUSIONS: The interaction of CD200 with CD200R therefore contributes to the hyporesponsive innate immune state following influenza virus infection that predisposes to secondary bacterial infection, a phenomenon that has the potential for immune modulation.
-------------------------------------

10017179_234 - 0.878597011004 - science
[ketoconazole, yeast, ovale, phagocytosis, neutrophil, cell, intracellular, human]

Enhanced phagocytosis and intracellular killing of Pityrosporum ovale by human neutrophils after exposure to ketoconazole is correlated to changes of the yeast cell surface.
In seborrhoeic dermatitis an inflammatory response occurs secondary to large numbers of Pityrosporum yeasts appearing within and beneath the epidermis. To study the interaction between human neutrophils and P. ovale and any immunomodulating effect of antifungal agents, the yeast was exposed to ketoconazole and then incorporated into neutrophil monolayer assays. Phagocytosis was complement dependent and reached a maximum after 40 min. Ketoconazole at 25, 50 and 100 mg l-1 had no significant effect on phagocytosis of P. ovale. However, when yeast cells were pretreated with ketoconazole for 2 h before exposure to the phagocyte monolayer there was a significant enhancement of phagocytosis with increasing drug concentration. Intracellular killing of P. ovale was assessed by methylene blue dye exclusion. In the absence of ketoconazole, 5% of intracellular yeast cells were killed following internalization for 2 h. Pretreatment of yeast cells with ketoconazole at 10 and 100 mg l-1 for 2 h prior to ingestion significantly increased intracellular killing to a maximum of 23%. This study demonstrates that yeast cells of P. ovale are readily ingested by human neutrophils by a complement dependent process. Phagocytosis is enhanced if the organism is exposed to ketoconazole before opsonisation and ingestion. The inability of neutrophils to kill P. ovale is modulated in the presence of therapeutic concentrations of ketoconazole.
-------------------------------------

10017136_234 - 0.83172952434 - science
[mycn, expression, protein, gene, model, level, max]

Investigation of system properties related to MYCN oncogene expression in neuroblastoma
Neuroblastoma (NB) is one the most common cancers in infancy and childhood, andpossession of amplified MYCN gene sequence (gene locus 2p24) is related toaggressive disease and poor prognosis, with a clear distinction established regardingthe survival of patients based on the gene copy-number of MYCN. However, theexpression of MYCN has been reported to vary between patients of even the sameNB subgroups and more importantly its significance in relation to NB prognosis isstill not clearly established with various reports presenting contradicting results.In this study, a bottom-up Systems Biology approach is suggested for studying boththe significance of MYCN expression, but also the distribution of control in therelated pathways that regulate this expression. An initial model was constructeddescribing the basic steps in MYCN expression and it was parameterised with valuesobtained from the literature. The results from the model simulations and analysisgenerated the hypothesis that the expression of MYCN cannot be used exclusively asa predictive factor without taking into account the relative levels of its dimerisationpartner, the protein MAX. Additionally, it was predicted that the amplification ofMYCN had a more pronounced relative effect at lower rather than at higher MYCNgene copy numbers.In order to create separate models for 4 NB cell-lines, it was necessary to performabsolute measurements for MYCN at the DNA, mRNA and protein level, as well asfor the MAX protein. The MYCN gene copy numbers were measured using theqPCR method, while a new data analysis method was suggested for performingabsolute quantification with the use of house-keeping genes, appropriate statisticalmethods and no reference samples. The relative amounts of MYCN mRNA werealso measured using qPCR and the results obtained were in agreement with thesuggested levels from the literature.The absolute measurement of the N-Myc and MAX proteins was attempted usingtwo complementary methods, western blots and ELISA. A series of optimisationexperiments and data analysis steps were taken that resulted in the refinement of theexperimental conditions to the point where they can be used for successfulquantification of the absolute levels of the N-Myc protein. Alternatively, theprocedure used for the MAX protein proved problematic and was not as successful.Overall, this study was successful in becoming the first step for an expanded bottomupsystems biology study regarding the significance of MYCN expression in NB.The combination of both the modelling and experimental parts of this workillustrated some of the potential benefits of Systems Biology approaches in studyingdisease. In this case the resulting model, once fully parameterised with experimentaldata, can be expanded in a number of suggested ways that address questions like therole and control of MYCN expression in relation to the cell-cycle deregulation ormulti-drug resistance in NB, giving in the process a better understanding regardingsuitable treatment targets for individual NB cases.
-------------------------------------

10005285_234 - 0.930437635377 - science
[tendon, adhesion, cell, formation]

Tendon is covered by a basement membrane epithelium that is required for cell retention and the prevention of adhesion formation.
The ability of tendons to glide smoothly during muscle contraction is impaired after injury by fibrous adhesions that form between the damaged tendon surface and surrounding tissues. To understand how adhesions form we incubated excised tendons in fibrin gels (to mimic the homeostatic environment at the injury site) and assessed cell migration. We noticed cells exiting the tendon from only the cut ends. Furthermore, treatment of the tendon with trypsin resulted in cell extravagation from the shaft of the tendons. Electron microscopy and immunolocalisation studies showed that the tendons are covered by a novel cell layer in which a collagen type IV/laminin basement membrane (BM) overlies a keratinised epithelium. PCR and western blot analyses confirmed the expression of laminin β1 in surface cells, only. To evaluate the cell retentive properties of the BM in vivo we examined the tendons of the Col4a1(+/Svc) mouse that is heterozygous for a G-to-A transition in the Col4a1 gene that produces a G1064D substitution in the α1(IV) chain of collagen IV. The flexor tendons had a discontinuous BM, developed fibrous adhesions with overlying tissues, and were acellular at sites of adhesion formation. In further experiments, tenotomy of wild-type mice resulted in expression of laminin throughout the adhesion. In conclusion, we show the existence of a novel tendon BM-epithelium that is required to prevent adhesion formation. The Col4a1(+/Svc) mouse is an effective animal model for studying adhesion formation because of the presence of a structurally-defective collagen type IV-containing BM.
-------------------------------------

10011644_234 - 0.887661960723 - science
[trypanosome, silicon, model]

The silicon trypanosome
African trypanosomes have emerged as promising unicellular model organisms for the next generation of systems biology. They offer unique advantages, due to their relative simplicity, the availability of all standard genomics techniques and a long history of quantitative research. Reproducible cultivation methods exist for morphologically and physiologically distinct life-cycle stages. The genome has been sequenced, and microarrays, RNA-interference and high-accuracy metabolomics are available. Furthermore, the availability of extensive kinetic data on all glycolytic enzymes has led to the early development of a complete, experiment-based dynamic model of an important biochemical pathway. Here we describe the achievements of trypanosome systems biology so far and outline the necessary steps towards the ambitious aim of creating a Silicon Trypanosome, a comprehensive, experiment-based, multi-scale mathematical model of trypanosome physiology. We expect that, in the long run, the quantitative modelling enabled by the Silicon Trypanosome will play a key role in selecting the most suitable targets for developing new anti-parasite drugs. Copyright ?? 2010 Cambridge University Press.
-------------------------------------

10005585_234 - 0.95866137536 - medicine
[patient, bowel, syndrome, irritable, hypnotherapy, case]

Hypnotherapy in severe irritable bowel syndrome: further experience.
Fifteen patients with severe intractable irritable bowel syndrome previously reported as successfully treated with hypnotherapy, have now been followed up for a mean duration of 18 months. All patients remain in remission although two have experienced a single relapse overcome by an additional session of hypnotherapy. Experience with a further 35 patients is reported giving a total group of 50. This group was divided into classical cases, atypical cases and cases exhibiting significant psychopathology. The response rates were 95%, 43%, and 60% respectively. Patients over the age of 50 years responded very poorly (25%) whereas those below the age of 50 with classical irritable bowel syndrome exhibited a 100% response rate. This study confirms the successful effect of hypnotherapy in a larger series of patients with irritable bowel syndrome and defines some subgroup variations.
-------------------------------------

10010334_234 - 0.967249780523 - science
[biology, synthetic]

A turning point for natural product discovery-ESF-EMBO research conference: synthetic biology of antibiotic production.
Synthetic Biology is in a critical phase of its development: it has finally reached the point where it can move from proof-of-principle studies to real-world applications. Secondary metabolite biosynthesis, especially the discovery and production of antibiotics, is a particularly relevant target area for such applications of synthetic biology. The first international conference to explore this subject was held in Spain in October 2011. In four sessions on General Synthetic Biology, Filamentous Fungal Systems, Actinomyces Systems, and Tools and Host Structures, scientists presented the most recent technological and scientific advances, and a final-day Forward Look Plenary Discussion identified future trends in the field. ?? 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
-------------------------------------

10011142_234 - 0.840594476908 - science
[modelling, reliability, biomarker, mathematical, glutathione, metabolism, cited, times, approach]

A mathematical modelling approach to assessing the reliability of biomarkers of glutathione metabolism
Times Cited: 6
-------------------------------------

10017036_234 - 0.891008979732 - medicine
[delirium, day, rivastigmine, patient, group, treatment, placebo, study]

Rivastigmine in the treatment of delirium in older people: a pilot study.
BACKGROUND: Delirium is common in the elderly and is associated with high mortality and negative health outcomes. Reduced activity in the cholinergic system has been implicated in the pathogenesis of delirium. Cholinesterase inhibitors, which increase cholinergic activity, may therefore be beneficial in the treatment of delirium. METHODS: This is a double-blind, placebo-controlled randomized pilot study of the treatment of delirium with a cholinesterase inhibitor of patients admitted to hospital medical wards. Patients over the age of 65 years were identified as having delirium by the Confusion Assessment Method (CAM). Patients with delirium were randomized to receive rivastigmine 1.5 mg once a day increasing to 1.5 mg twice a day after seven days or an identical placebo (two tablets after seven days). RESULTS: Fifteen patients entered the trial; eight received rivastigmine and seven received placebo. All of the rivastigmine group, but only three of the placebo group, were negative for delirium on the CAM when they left the study and eventually discharged home. There was no significant difference in the duration of delirium between the two groups (rivastigmine group 6.3 days versus placebo group 9.9 days, p = 0.5, 95% confidence interval -15.6-8.4). CONCLUSIONS: The numbers of patients who screened positive for delirium was very small and as a result the sample size was too small to make any meaningful inferences about treatment of delirium. Despite the small numbers included in the study, there are some indicators that rivastigmine may be safe and effective in treating delirium.
-------------------------------------

10009820_234 - 0.929026062721 - science
[cilofungin, neutrophil, phagocytosis, candida, albican, pretreatment, blastospore, complement]

Stimulation of human neutrophil phagocytosis of Candida albicans by a beta-glucan synthase inhibitor, cilofungin.
The effect of a lipopeptide antifungal agent, cilofungin, on serum opsonization and phagocytosis of Candida albicans yeast phase cells in human neutrophil monolayer assays was investigated. Simultaneous addition of fungicidal concentrations of cilofungin did not enhance or inhibit phagocytosis of C. albicans. Pretreatment of Candida blastospores with cilofungin in the absence of serum complement for 1 h did not affect phagocytosis. However, pretreatment of blastospores with cilofungin and complement promoted a significant increase in ingestion. Pretreatment of neutrophils with cilofungin in serum-free media did not affect neutrophil viability. In contrast, pre-exposure of neutrophils to cilofungin in the presence of complement inhibited ingestion of blastospores.
-------------------------------------

10003269_234 - 0.940877524697 - science
[fibroblast, collagen, keloid, expression, dw, type, skin, normal, effect]

A novel in vitro assay for electrophysiological research on human skin fibroblasts: degenerate electrical waves downregulate collagen I expression in keloid fibroblasts.
Electrical stimulation (ES) has been used for the treatment of wounds and has been shown to alter gene expression and protein synthesis in skin fibroblasts in vitro. Here, we have developed a new in vitro model system for testing the effects of precisely defined, different types of ES on the collagen expression of normal and keloid human skin fibroblasts. Keloid fibroblasts were studied because they show excessive collagen production. Both types of fibroblasts were electrically stimulated with alternating current (AC), direct current (DC) or degenerate waves (DW). Cells were subjected to 20, 75 and 150mV/mm electric field strengths at 10 and 60Hz frequencies. At lower electric fields, all types of ES upregulated collagen I in both cell types compared to controls. However, at higher electric field strength (150mV/mm) and frequency (60Hz), DW maximally downregulated collagen I in keloid fibroblasts, yet had significantly lower cytotoxic effects on normal fibroblasts than AC and DC. Compared to unstimulated cells, both normal skin and keloid fibroblasts showed a significant decrease in collagen I expression after 12h of DW and AC stimulation. In contrast, increasing amplitude of DC upregulated collagen I and PAI-1 gene transcription in normal and keloid fibroblasts, along with increased cytotoxicity effects. Thus, our new preclinical assay system shows highly differential effects of specific types of ES on human fibroblast collagen expression and cytotoxicity and identifies DW of electrical current (DW) as a promising, novel therapeutic strategy for suppressing excessive collagen I formation in keloid disease.
-------------------------------------

10003482_234 - 0.758034853084 - science
[shot, microtubule, spectraplakin, protein, function, axonal, growth, tip, eb1, loss]

Spectraplakins promote microtubule-mediated axonal growth by functioning as structural microtubule-associated proteins and EB1-dependent +TIPs (tip interacting proteins).
The correct outgrowth of axons is essential for the development and regeneration of nervous systems. Axon growth is primarily driven by microtubules. Key regulators of microtubules in this context are the spectraplakins, a family of evolutionarily conserved actin-microtubule linkers. Loss of function of the mouse spectraplakin ACF7 or of its close Drosophila homolog Short stop/Shot similarly cause severe axon shortening and microtubule disorganization. How spectraplakins perform these functions is not known. Here we show that axonal growth-promoting roles of Shot require interaction with EB1 (End binding protein) at polymerizing plus ends of microtubules. We show that binding of Shot to EB1 requires SxIP motifs in Shot's C-terminal tail (Ctail), mutations of these motifs abolish Shot functions in axonal growth, loss of EB1 function phenocopies Shot loss, and genetic interaction studies reveal strong functional links between Shot and EB1 in axonal growth and microtubule organization. In addition, we report that Shot localizes along microtubule shafts and stabilizes them against pharmacologically induced depolymerization. This function is EB1-independent but requires net positive charges within Ctail which essentially contribute to the microtubule shaft association of Shot. Therefore, spectraplakins are true members of two important classes of neuronal microtubule regulating proteins: +TIPs (tip interacting proteins; plus end regulators) and structural MAPs (microtubule-associated proteins). From our data we deduce a model that relates the different features of the spectraplakin C terminus to the two functions of Shot during axonal growth.
-------------------------------------

10008983_234 - 0.703775067777 - science
[theory, stat, eft, compton, chiral, proton]

Using EFT to analyze low-energy Compton scattering from protons and  light nuclei
We discuss the application of an effective field theory (EFT) whichincorporates the chiral symmetry of QCD to Compton scattering from the protonand deuteron. We describe the chiral EFT analysis of the proton Comptonscattering database presented in our recent review (arXiv:1203.6834), whichgives: alpha^{(p)}=10.5 +/- 0.5(stat) +/- 0.8(theory); beta^{(p)}= 2.7 +/-0.5(stat) +/- 0.8(theory), for the electric and magnetic dipole polarizabilityof the proton. We also summarize the chiral EFT analysis of the world data oncoherent Compton scattering from deuterium presented in arXiv:1203.6834. Thatyields: alpha^{(s)}=10.5 +/- 2.0(stat) +/- 0.8(theory); beta^{(s)}=3.6 +/-1.0(stat) +/- 0.8(theory).
-------------------------------------

10009707_234 - 0.834738056853 - science
[resistance, aspergillosis, azole, number]

Azole antifungal resistance today: focus on Aspergillus.
Oral triazole therapy is well established for the treatment of invasive aspergillosis (IPA), allergic aspergillosis (ABPA), and chronic pulmonary aspergillosis (CPA), and is often long-term. Resistance to triazole azole antifungal drugs in Aspergillus fumigatus is now a major clinical problem in a number of European locations, in China, Canada and the USA with particularly high frequencies from the north-west of the UK, and The Netherlands. A number of centers are reporting the continuing increasing frequency and evolution of resistance mechanisms in A. fumigatus, in both azole-naïve and patients treated with azoles. The increasing rate of resistance is of concern. A number of resistance mechanisms have been found. The biofilm modality of Aspergillus growth may have a number of therapeutic implications for aspergillosis, including antifungal resistance. Microbiological diagnosis of aspergillosis is limited by poor culture yield, leading to uncertainty about the frequency of triazole resistance. Direct resistance testing in culture-negative clinical samples may add additional insights into the prevalence of azole resistance in A. fumigatus.
-------------------------------------

10018546_234 - 0.70177768601 - science
[characterisation, superalloy, stress, machined, high, residual, preuss, surface, axinte, nickel-base]

Characterisation of residual stresses in machined surfaces of a high strength nickel-base superalloy
Li, W. Preuss, M. Withers, P. J. Axinte, D. Andrews, P.
-------------------------------------

10003088_234 - 0.762563256767 - medicine
[somatic, symptom, syndrome, multiple, health, functional, status, fss]

Multiple Somatic Symptoms Predict Impaired Health Status in Functional Somatic Syndromes.
BACKGROUND: The relationship between functional somatic syndromes and multiple somatic symptoms is unclear. PURPOSE: We assessed whether the number of somatic symptoms is a predictor of health status in three functional somatic syndromes (FSS). METHODS: In a population-based study of 990 UK adults we assessed chronic widespread pain (CWP), chronic fatigue (CF) and irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) by questionnaire and medical record data. We assessed health status (Short Form 12 and EQ-5D), number of somatic symptoms (Somatic Symptom Inventory) and anxiety/depression (Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale) both at baseline and at follow-up 1 year later. RESULTS: The proportion of people with an FSS who also have multiple somatic symptoms (52-55 %) was similar in the three functional syndromes. The presence of multiple somatic symptoms was associated with more impaired health status both at baseline and at follow-up. This finding was not explained by severity of FSS. In the absence of multiple somatic symptoms, the health status of the FSS was fair or good. In multiple regression analysis, the number of somatic symptoms, the presence of a functional syndrome (CWP or CF) and anxiety/depression were predictors of EQ-5D thermometer at follow-up after adjustment for confounders. CONCLUSIONS: Multiple somatic symptoms in people with an FSS are associated with impaired health status and this cannot be explained by more severe functional syndrome or the presence of anxiety and depression.
-------------------------------------

10008019_234 - 0.761836516393 - science
[times, piezoelectricity, wurtzite, vol, second-order, cited, iii-n, semiconductor]

Second-order piezoelectricity in wurtzite III-N semiconductors (vol 84, 085211, 2011)
Times Cited: 0
-------------------------------------

10003282_234 - 0.889050366976 - science
[pacap, human, skin, cell, vascular, vpac1r, response, concentration-dependent, dermal]

Pituitary adenylate cyclase activating polypeptide: an important vascular regulator in human skin in vivo.
Pituitary adenylate cyclase-activating peptide (PACAP) is an important neuropeptide and immunomodulator in various tissues. Although this peptide and its receptors (ie, VPAC1R, VPAC2R, and PAC1R) are expressed in human skin, their biological roles are unknown. Therefore, we tested whether PACAP regulates vascular responses in human skin in vivo. When injected intravenously, PACAP induced a significant, concentration-dependent vascular response (ie, flush, erythema, edema) and mediated a significant and concentration-dependent increase in intrarectal body temperature that peaked at 2.7°C. Topical application of PACAP induced marked concentration-dependent edema. Immunohistochemistry revealed a close association of PACAP-immunoreactive nerve fibers with mast cells and dermal blood vessels. VPAC1R was expressed by dermal endothelial cells, CD4+ and CD8+ T cells, mast cells, and keratinocytes, whereas VPAC2R was expressed only in keratinocytes. VPAC1R protein and mRNA were also detected in human dermal microvascular endothelial cells. The PACAP-induced change in cAMP production in these cells demonstrated VPAC1R to be functional. PACAP treatment of organ-cultured human skin strongly increased the number of CD31+ vessel cross-sections. Taken together, these results suggest that PACAP directly induces vascular responses that may be associated with neurogenic inflammation, indicating for the first time that PACAP may be a crucial vascular regulator in human skin in vivo. Antagonists to PACAP function may be beneficial for the treatment of inflammatory skin diseases with a neurogenic component.
-------------------------------------

10018315_234 - 0.749006828885 - science
[proinflammatory, viral, il-17, virus, infection, expression, antiviral]

IL-17 boosts proinflammatory outcome of antiviral response in human cells.
Excessive inflammation during bacterial and viral infections is destructive to the host and involves elevated production of proinflammatory cytokines. It is especially deleterious in organs with space constraints such as lung and the CNS. Indeed, a number of viruses that infect lungs, such as avian influenza virus, SARS-associated coronavirus, and respiratory syncytial virus, elicit a very high level of proinflammatory cytokines; however, it is unclear what triggers their production. In this study, we show that IL-17 commonly produced during viral infection specifically augments a proinflammatory response by directly synergizing with antiviral signaling. Costimulation of primary human fibroblasts with IL-17 greatly enhanced respiratory syncytial virus-induced or synthetic dsRNA-based viral mimic polyinosinic:polycytidylic acid-induced expression of proinflammatory genes without affecting expression of IFN-β-stimulated or IFN-stimulated genes. Knockdown of expression of known mediators of the antiviral signaling pathway revealed that the IL-17-poly(I:C) synergy depends on the presence of the transcriptional factors RelA and IFN regulatory factor 3 and IκB kinases. Moreover, this synergy was blocked by an IκB kinase inhibitor, BAY 11-7082. These findings shed light on the molecular mechanisms behind IL-17-dependent immunopathology observed in viral infections.
-------------------------------------

10003266_234 - 0.711456841435 - science
[hair, rac1, mouse, rescue]

A function for Rac1 in the terminal differentiation and pigmentation of hair.
The small GTPase Rac1 is ubiquitously expressed in proliferating and differentiating layers of the epidermis and hair follicles. Previously, Rac1 was shown to regulate stem cell behaviour in these compartments. We have asked whether Rac1 has, in addition, a specific, stem-cell-independent function in the regulation of terminal hair follicle differentiation. To address this, we have expressed a constitutively active mutant of Rac1, L61Rac1, only in the basal epidermal layer and outer root sheath of mice possessing an epidermis-specific deletion of endogenous Rac1, which experience severe hair loss. The resulting 'rescue' mice exhibited a hair coat throughout their lives. Therefore, expression of Rac1 activity in the keratin-14-positive compartment of the skin is sufficient for the formation of hair follicles and hair in normal quantities. The quality of hair formed in rescue mice was, however, not normal. Rescue mice showed a grey, dull hair coat, whereas that of wild-type and L61Rac1-transgenic mice was black and shiny. Hair analysis in rescue mice revealed altered structures of the hair shaft and the cuticle and disturbed organization of medulla cells and pigment distribution. Disorganization of medulla cells correlates with the absence of cortical, keratin-filled spikes that normally protrude from the cortex into the medulla. The desmosomal cadherin Dsc2, which normally decorates these protrusions, was found to be reduced or absent in the hair of rescue mice. Our study demonstrates regulatory functions for Rac1 in the formation of hair structure and pigmentation and thereby identifies, for the first time, a role for Rac1 in terminal differentiation.
-------------------------------------

10003169_234 - 0.790481971628 - medicine
[alzheimer, psychiatry, disease, cognitive, mild, research]

Staging of the cognitive decline in Alzheimer's disease: insights from a detailed neuropsychological investigation of mild cognitive impairment and mild Alzheimer's disease
Carter, Stephen F Caine, Diana Burns, Alistair Herholz, Karl Lambon Ralph, Matthew A Medical Research Council/United Kingdom Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't England International journal of geriatric psychiatry Int J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2012 Apr;27(4):423-32. doi: 10.1002/gps.2738. Epub 2011 May 25.
-------------------------------------

10010307_234 - 0.787373392505 - science
[phylogeny, streptomyce, species, tree, genome-based, phylogenetic, relative, robust, method]

Genome-based phylogenetic analysis of Streptomyces and its relatives
Motivation: Streptomyces is one of the best-studied genera of the order Actinomycetales due to its great importance in medical science, ecology and the biotechnology industry. A comprehensive, detailed and robust phylogeny of Streptomyces and its relatives is needed for understanding how this group emerged and maintained such a vast diversity throughout evolution and how soil-living mycelial forms (e.g., Streptomyces s. str.) are related to parasitic, unicellular pathogens (e.g., Mycobacterium tuberculosis) or marine species (e.g., Salinispora tropica). The most important application area of such a phylogenetic analysis will be in the comparative re-annotation of genome sequences and the reconstruction of Streptomyces metabolic networks for biotechnology. Methods: Classical 16S-rRNA-based phylogenetic reconstruction does not guarantee to produce well-resolved robust trees that reflect the overall relationship between bacterial species with widespread horizontal gene transfer. In our study we therefore combine three whole genome-based phylogenies with eight different, highly informative single-gene phylogenies to determine a new robust consensus tree of 45 Actinomycetales species with completely sequenced genomes. Results: None of the individual methods achieved a resolved phylogeny of Streptomyces and its relatives. Single-gene approaches failed to yield a detailed phylogeny; even though the single trees are in good agreement among each other, they show very low resolution of inner branches. The three whole genome-based methods improve resolution considerably. Only by combining the phylogenies from single gene-based and genome-based approaches we finally obtained a consensus tree with well-resolved branches for the entire set of Actinomycetales species. This phylogenetic information is stable and informative enough for application to the system-wide comparative modeling of bacterial physiology. ?? 2009 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
-------------------------------------

10005037_234 - 0.746629468365 - technology_and_computing
[beam, method, crack]

An approximate method for determining the static deflection and natural frequency of a cracked beam
This paper provides an approximate method to determine the stiffness and the fundamental frequency of a cracked beam. The cracked beam is first represented as an un-cracked beam with equivalent reduced sections around the cracks. The effect of the cracks is explained, visualised and quantified using the equivalence concept developed for stepped beams with periodically variable cross-sections. Then an alternative expression of the improved Rayleigh method is provided to calculate the natural frequencies of a beam with a variable stiffness distribution along its length. As the method is insensitive to the assumed mode shapes, it avoids the difficulty in choosing appropriate mode shapes and yields accurate results. This is shown using several examples to compare the results determined using the proposed method and the Finite Element method (FEM). The method greatly simplifies the calculation of cracked beams with complicated configurations, such as a beam with several cracks, a cracked beam with concentrated masses, a beam with cracks close to each other, and a beam with periodically distributed cracks.
-------------------------------------

10002071_234 - 0.80034376056 - science
[parcellation, functional, cortical, human, structural, tractography, diffusion, cortex, region, method]

Connectivity-based structural and functional parcellation of the human cortex using diffusion imaging and tractography
The parcellation of the cortex via its anatomical properties has been an important research endeavor for over a century. To date, however, a universally accepted parcellation scheme for the human brain still remains elusive. In the current review, we explore the use of in vivo diffusion imaging and white matter tractography as a non-invasive method for the structural and functional parcellation of the human cerebral cortex, discussing the strengths and limitations of the current approaches. Cortical parcellation via white matter connectivity is based on the premise that, as connectional anatomy determines functional organization, it should be possible to segregate functionally-distinct cortical regions by identifying similarities and differences in connectivity profiles. Recent studies have provided initial evidence in support of the efficacy of this connectional parcellation methodology. Such investigations have identified distinct cortical subregions which correlate strongly with functional regions identified via fMRI and meta-analyses. Furthermore, a strong parallel between the cortical regions defined via tractographic and more traditional cytoarchitectonic parcellation methods has been observed. However, the degree of correspondence and relative functional importance of cytoarchitectonic- versus connectivity-derived parcellations still remains unclear. Diffusion tractography remains one of the only methods capable of visualizing the structural networks of the brain in vivo. As such, it is of vital importance to continue to improve the accuracy of the methodology and to extend its potential applications in the study of cognition in neurological health and disease.
-------------------------------------

10010323_234 - 0.939407958684 - science
[synthetic, secondary, metabolomic, metabolism, metabolic, compound]

Metabolomics methods for the synthetic biology of secondary metabolism
Many microbial secondary metabolites are of high biotechnological value for medicine, agriculture, and the food industry. Bacterial genome mining has revealed numerous novel secondary metabolite biosynthetic gene clusters, which encode the potential to synthesize a large diversity of compounds that have never been observed before. The stimulation or "awakening" of this cryptic microbial secondary metabolism has naturally attracted the attention of synthetic microbiologists, who exploit recent advances in DNA sequencing and synthesis to achieve unprecedented control over metabolic pathways. One of the indispensable tools in the synthetic biology toolbox is metabolomics, the global quantification of small biomolecules. This review illustrates the pivotal role of metabolomics for the synthetic microbiology of secondary metabolism, including its crucial role in novel compound discovery in microbes, the examination of side products of engineered metabolic pathways, as well as the identification of major bottlenecks for the overproduction of compounds of interest, especially in combination with metabolic modeling. We conclude by highlighting remaining challenges and recent technological advances that will drive metabolomics towards fulfilling its potential as a cornerstone technology of synthetic microbiology. ?? 2012 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
-------------------------------------

10003460_234 - 0.845676922271 - science
[exchanger, cytosol, receptor, excitability, er, mitochondrial, astrocyte, extracellular, plasmalemmal, membrane]

Calcium signalling in astroglia.
Astroglia possess excitability based on movements of Ca(2+) ions between intracellular compartments and plasmalemmal Ca(2+) fluxes. This "Ca(2+) excitability" is controlled by several families of proteins located in the plasma membrane, within the cytosol and in the intracellular organelles, most notably in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and mitochondria. Accumulation of cytosolic Ca(2+) can be caused by the entry of Ca(2+) from the extracellular space through ionotropic receptors and store-operated channels expressed in astrocytes. Plasmalemmal Ca(2+) ATP-ase and sodium-calcium exchanger extrude cytosolic Ca(2+) to the extracellular space; the exchanger can also operate in reverse, depending of the intercellular Na(+) concentration, to deliver Ca(2+) to the cytosol. The ER internal store possesses inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptors which can be activated upon stimulation of astrocytes through a multiple plasma membrane metabotropic G-protein coupled receptors. This leads to release of Ca(2+) from the ER and its elevation in the cytosol, the level of which can be modulated by mitochondria. The mitochondrial uniporter takes up Ca(2+) into the matrix, while free Ca(2+) exits the matrix through the mitochondrial Na(+)/Ca(2+) exchanger as well as via transient openings of the mitochondrial permeability transition pore. One of the prominent consequences of astroglial Ca(2+) excitability is gliotransmission, a release of transmitters from astroglia which can lead to signalling to adjacent neurones.
-------------------------------------

10011712_234 - 0.782519268815 - science
[dicer, mirna, cytotrophoblast, proliferation]

Dicer-dependent miRNAs provide an endogenous restraint on cytotrophoblast proliferation.
Mature microRNAs (miRNAs) are processed from non-functional (pre)-miRNAs by the enzyme Dicer. In this study, manipulation of Dicer level was used to explore the influence of miRNAs on cytotrophoblast proliferation in human placenta. Immunohistochemistry (IHC) showed Dicer in cytotrophoblast, but not in terminally differentiated syncytiotrophoblast. siRNA-mediated knockdown of Dicer was used to effect a global reduction in miRNA in first trimester placental explants, as a result of which cytotrophoblast proliferation was significantly enhanced. QPCR and IHC analysis following Dicer knockdown revealed that the expression of two nodal pro-mitogenic signalling molecules expressed within cytotrophoblast, ERK and SHP-2, was significantly enhanced. Studies are now required to identify individual miRNAs involved in regulating trophoblast proliferation.
-------------------------------------

10009746_234 - 0.777801904138 - medicine
[fungal, patient, colonization, haematological, antifungal]

Fungal colonization of haematological patients receiving cytotoxic chemotherapy: emergence of azole-resistant Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
Fungal colonization during cytotoxic chemotherapy was studied in 42 patients with a recent diagnosis of a haematological malignancy. In total, 2759 surveillance cultures were taken from the nostrils, throat, urine, stool and perineal region. Seven hundred and ninety-six positive surveillance cultures (28.9%) yielded 968 fungal isolates. The rate of fungal colonization did not differ between patients with acute leukaemia, patients with other haematological malignancies and control patients in the same ward at admission (71% vs. 67% vs. 80%). Patients with acute leukaemia were colonized at a significantly lower rate in samples from the throat (32%), urine (10%), stool (45%) and perineum (29%) taken during hospitalization when compared with other haematological patients (respective values 58%, 21%, 67% and 45%; P-values 0.001). This could be attributed to differences in the use of antifungal drugs. Although 21/42 (50%) of our patients had multiple-site fungal colonization at the end of follow-up, only one systemic Candida infection was diagnosed. Extensive use of antifungal treatment may have influenced the low incidence of systemic fungal infections during the follow-up. In addition to Candida species, Malassezia furfur, Geotrichum candidum and Saccharomyces cerevisiae were frequently isolated. The rate of S. cerevisiae isolation increased significantly over time after admission (1%, vs. 18% of isolates, P<0.001), suggesting hospital-acquired transmission. These isolates were highly resistant to azole antifungals (MIC90 128 microg/mL for fluconazole and 16 microg/ml, for itraconazole), and caused persistent multiple site colonization in 12 patients. Extensive use of antifungal agents in a haematological ward may keep the incidence of invasive fungal infections low in spite of heavy fungal colonization. However, there may be a risk of emergence of resistant fungal strains.
-------------------------------------

10009584_234 - 0.762704066025 - science
[melanoma, cell, pde5a, braf, increase, downregulation, invasion, oncogenic]

Oncogenic BRAF Induces Melanoma Cell Invasion by Downregulating the cGMP-Specific Phosphodiesterase PDE5A
We show that in melanoma cells oncogenic BRAF, acting through MEK and the transcription factor BRN2, downregulates the cGMP-specific phosphodiesterase PDE5A. Although PDE5A downregulation causes a small decrease in proliferation, its major impact is to stimulate a dramatic increase in melanoma cell invasion. This is because PDE5A downregulation leads to an increase in cGMP, which induces an increase in cytosolic Ca(2+), stimulating increased contractility and inducing invasion. PDE5A downregulation also this leads to an increase in short-term and long-term colonization of the lungs by melanoma cells. We do not observe this pathway in NRAS mutant melanoma or BRAF mutant colorectal cells. Thus, we show that in melanoma cells oncogenic BRAF induces invasion through downregulation of PDE5A.
-------------------------------------

10007491_234 - 0.845651522758 - science
[plasma, analysis, serum, metabolomic, clinical, patient, sclc, difference]

Is serum or plasma more appropriate for intersubject comparisons in metabolomic studies? An assessment in patients with small-cell lung cancer.
In clinical analyses, the most appropriate biofluid should be analyzed for optimal assay performance. For biological fluids, the most readily accessible is blood, and metabolomic analyses can be performed either on plasma or serum. To determine the optimal agent for analysis, metabolic profiles of matched human serum and plasma were assessed by gas chromatography/time-of-flight mass spectrometry and ultrahigh-performance liquid chromatography mass spectrometry (in positive and negative electrospray ionization modes). Comparison of the two metabolomes, in terms of reproducibility, discriminative ability and coverage, indicated that they offered similar analytical opportunities. An analysis of the variation between 29 small-cell lung cancer (SCLC) patients revealed that the differences between individuals are markedly similar for the two biofluids. However, significant differences between the levels of some specific metabolites were identified, as were differences in the intersubject variability of some metabolite levels. Glycerophosphocholines, erythritol, creatinine, hexadecanoic acid, and glutamine in plasma, but not in serum, were shown to correlate with life expectancy for SCLC patients, indicating the utility of metabolomic analyses in clinical prognosis and the particular utility of plasma in relation to the clinical management of SCLC.
-------------------------------------

10018378_234 - 0.836305999887 - science
[irf5, macrophage, expression, gene, polarization]

IRF5 promotes inflammatory macrophage polarization and TH1-TH17 responses
Polymorphisms in the gene encoding the transcription factor IRF5 that lead to higher mRNA expression are associated with many autoimmune diseases. Here we show that IRF5 expression in macrophages was reversibly induced by inflammatory stimuli and contributed to the plasticity of macrophage polarization. High expression of IRF5 was characteristic of M1 macrophages, in which it directly activated transcription of the genes encoding interleukin 12 subunit p40 (IL-12p40), IL-12p35 and IL-23p19 and repressed the gene encoding IL-10. Consequently, those macrophages set up the environment for a potent T helper type 1 (T(H)1)-T(H)17 response. Global gene expression analysis demonstrated that exogenous IRF5 upregulated or downregulated expression of established phenotypic markers of M1 or M2 macrophages, respectively. Our data suggest a critical role for IRF5 in M1 macrophage polarization and define a previously unknown function for IRF5 as a transcriptional repressor.
-------------------------------------

10008686_234 - 0.926582507148 - medicine
[patient, sp1049c, response, doxorubicin, adenocarcinoma, ci, objective, rate, pr, disease]

A phase 2 study of SP1049C, doxorubicin in P-glycoprotein-targeting pluronics, in patients with advanced adenocarcinoma of the esophagus and gastroesophageal junction.
PURPOSE: To evaluate the antitumor activity of SP1049C, a novel P-glycoprotein targeting micellar formulation of doxorubicin, consisting of doxorubicin and two non-ionic block copolymers (pluronics), in patients with advanced adenocarcinoma of the esophagus and gastroesophageal junction (GEJ). Patients and METHODS: Patients with metastatic or locally advanced unresectable adenocarcinoma of the esophagus or GEJ who had not previously received systemic chemotherapy and had measurable disease were treated with SP1049C 75 mg/m(2) (doxorubicin equivalents) as a brief intravenous infusion every 3 weeks until disease progression or unacceptable toxicity. The primary endpoint was the objective response rate in patients who had received a least one course of SP1049C and had undergone tumor assessment, whereas, secondary endpoints included the objective response rate, progression-free survival (PFS), overall survival, and safety in the intent-to-treat (ITT) population. A review of scans was also conducted post-hoc by a blinded panel of radiologists. RESULTS: Twenty-one patients, of which 19 were evaluable for response, were treated with at least one dose of SP1049C. Nine patients had a partial response (PR) and eight patients had either a minor response or stable disease as their best response. The objective response rate was 47% (95% CI: 24.4-71) in the evaluable patient population, whereas the objective response rate was 43% (95% CI: 21.8-65.9) in the ITT population. The post-hoc radiological review confirmed that all nine responders had a PR; seven of the nine had a PR that was confirmed by a subsequent scan, whilst two patients had unconfirmed PRs. The median overall survival and PFS were 10.0 months (95%CI: 4.8-11.2) and 6.6 months (95% CI: 4.5-7.6), respectively. Neutropenia was the principal toxicity of SP1049C. Four patients developed an absolute percentage decrement of at least 15% in their left ventricular ejection fraction, none of which decreased to below 45% nor were symptomatic. CONCLUSION: SP1049C has a notable single-agent activity in patients with adenocarcinoma of the esophagus and GEJ, as well as an acceptable safety profile. These results, in addition to the results of preclinical studies demonstrating superior antitumor activity of SP1049C compared with doxorubicin in a standard formulation, indicate that further evaluations of SP1049C alone or combined with other relevant therapeutics in this disease setting are warranted.
-------------------------------------

10002039_234 - 0.848196748593 - science
[liposomal, pharmacokinetic, amphotericin, regimen, intermittent, conventional, linear, cohort, time, design]

Population pharmacokinetics of conventional and intermittent dosing of liposomal amphotericin B in adults: a first critical step for rational design of innovative regimens.
There is increased interest in intermittent regimen of liposomal amphotericin B, which may facilitate use in ambulatory settings. Little is known, however, about the most appropriate dosage and schedule of administration. Plasma pharmacokinetic data were acquired from 30 patients receiving liposomal amphotericin B for empirical treatment of suspected invasive fungal infection. Two cohorts were studied. The first cohort received 3 mg of liposomal amphotericin B/kg of body weight/day; the second cohort received 10 mg of liposomal amphotericin B/kg at time zero, followed by 5 mg/kg at 48 and 120 h. The levels of liposomal amphotericin B were measured by high-pressure liquid chromatography (HPLC). The pharmacokinetics were estimated by using a population methodology. Monte Carlo simulations were performed. D-optimal design was used to identify maximally informative sampling times for both conventional and intermittent regimens for future studies. A three-compartment pharmacokinetic model best described the data. The pharmacokinetics for both conventional and intermittent dosing were linear. The estimates for the mean (standard deviation) for clearance and the volume of the central compartment were 1.60 (0.85) liter/h and 20.61 (15.27) liters, respectively. Monte Carlo simulations demonstrated considerable variability in drug exposure. Bayesian estimates for clearance and volume increased in a linear manner with weight, but only the former was statistically significant (P = 0.039). D-optimal design provided maximally informative sampling times for future pharmacokinetic studies. The pharmacokinetics of a conventional and an intermittently administered high-dose regimen liposomal amphotericin B are linear. Further pharmacokinetic-pharmacodynamic preclinical and clinical studies are required to identify safe and effective intermittent regimens.
-------------------------------------

10003622_234 - 0.853587051822 - medicine
[cancer, ovarian, patient, case, study, treatment, target, recruitment, challenge]

Recruitment of newly diagnosed ovarian cancer patients proved challenging in a multicentre biobanking study.
OBJECTIVE: To explore the challenges of recruiting ovarian cancer patients and healthy controls to a cancer biobanking study. STUDY DESIGN AND SETTING: The study was set up in gynecological cancer centers in 10 National Health Service trusts across the United Kingdom. Women were approached if they were undergoing investigations/awaiting treatment for ovarian cancer, had a previous diagnosis of ovarian cancer, or were attending for annual screening in an ovarian cancer screening trial. Those who consented completed a detailed epidemiologic questionnaire, provided blood and tissue samples if appropriate. RESULTS: The overall proportion of those recruited compared with the expected targets was 76.4% for healthy controls, 86.0% for old cases, and 46.9% for new cases. Only 4 of 10 (40%) centers recruited over 50% of their target for new cases. Unwillingness to participate was reported as primarily because of patients being too unwell, wanting to focus only on their treatment, or having insufficient time because of conflicting medical appointments. Concerns about use of personal data or tissue and blood samples for genetic research and lack of direct benefit were reported as significant challenges to recruitment. CONCLUSION: When setting recruitment targets for patients undergoing investigations or awaiting treatment for cancer (new cases), it is important to consider lower response rates because of various patient, logistical, and trial-specific challenges.
-------------------------------------

10017104_234 - 0.812139037012 - medicine
[psoriatic, factor, tumour, therapy, inhibitor, arthritis, psoriasis, necrosis, spondyloarthritis, biologic]

Unmasking of axial spondyloarthritis and oligoarthritis following discontinuation of tumour necrosis factor inhibitor therapy for psoriasis.
Psoriatic arthritis remains a common cause of morbidity in patients with psoriasis. Little is known about the natural history of the disease and dermatologists do not consistently screen for its presence. We describe a patient with severe psoriasis where long-term biologic therapy with a tumour necrosis factor inhibitor was interrupted for clinical reasons, leading to a rapidly evolving axial spondyloarthritis and oligoarthritis. This unusual presentation of psoriatic arthritis may reflect masking of the disease by long-term treatment with a tumour necrosis factor inhibitor. We advocate the use of screening for psoriatic arthritis, including before and during treatment with biologic therapies.
-------------------------------------

10011178_234 - 0.889912961946 - technology_and_computing
[mode, optical, waveguide]

TE Mode Mixing Dynamics in Curved Multimode Optical Waveguides
Propagation of light through curved graded index optical waveguides supporting an arbitrary high number of modes is investigated. The discussion is restricted to optical wave fields which are well confined within the core region and losses through radiation are neglected. Using coupled mode theory formalism, two new forms for the propagation kernel for the transverse electric (TE) wave as it travels along a curved two-dimensional waveguide are presented. One form, involving the notion of "bend" modes, is shown to be attractive from a computational point of view as it allows an efficient numerical evaluation of the optical field for sharply bent waveguides.
-------------------------------------

10017007_234 - 0.70133442092 - science
[algorithm, genetic, gas, solution, multiple, case]

Applying Genetic Algorithms to Optimize the Cost of Multiple Sourcing Supply Chain Systems – An Industry Case Study
This chapter is to present a successful industry case applying Genetic Algorithms (GAs). The case has applied GAs for the purpose of optimizing the total cost of a multiple sourcing supply chain system. The system is characterized by a multiple sourcing model with stochastic demand. A mathematical model is adopted to describe the stochastic inventory with the many-to-many demandsupplier network problem and it simultaneously constitutes the inventory control and transportation parameters as well as price uncertainty factors. Genetic Algorithms are applied to derive optimal solutions through the optimization process. A numerical example and its solution demonstrate the detail solution procedure based on Genetic Algorithms and shows that GAs are able to solve such a di.cult problem e.ciently and easily. Further research is also discussed.
-------------------------------------

10013643_234 - 0.898860799561 - science
[peptide, cell, concentration, membrane, study]

Quantification of Cell Penetrating Peptide Uptake By Fluorescent Techniques
Cell penetrating peptides have been the focus of drug delivery research for 15 years due to their apparent ability to deliver cargoes inside cells more readily than many other carriers. Using two of the most commonly studied peptides (tat47-57 and R9), the present study differs from previous work by deliberately choosing to observe uptake with lower peptide concentrations closer to potential therapeutic doses, and by implementing raster image correlation spectroscopy (RICS) on a commercial microscope to quantify uptake in parallel to other techniques such as fluorescence correlation spectroscopy (FCS), confocal microscopy, and mass spectroscopy.An initial study using mass spectrometry and ExPASy (Expert Protein Analysis System) revealed that the peptides are stable for at least one hour in PBS. Based on this initial information and other experimental conditions, the study took two main directions with regards to the peptide: the membrane interaction and accumulation in the cell.The peptides interaction with the cell membrane revealed that neither tat-TAMRA nor R9-TAMRA disrupts the membrane of cells: incorporation of FM2-10 in the membrane was not modified in K562 cells whilst it was in presence of the control lytic peptides GALA and mellitin. Based on this information confocal microscopy was utilised to assess the localisation on the cell membrane. Peptide binding to the membrane appeared to be heterogeneous in distribution at 1µM bulk concentration.Accumulation in cells of the peptides was observed incubated at 37°C, confocal microscopy showed punctuated distribution with intracellular aggregations of fluorescence measuring between 2.5-3.5µm in diameter. Co-staining with a nuclear dye revealed these aggregations to be focused around the nucleus of the cell. Initial FCS experiments indicated a concentration dependent accumulation of the peptide in the cells and a decrease of the intracellular diffusion coefficients at high concentration possibly corresponding with molecular crowding. Interestingly the anomalous diffusion model did not statistically improve the results.RICS was implemented to study the kinetics of entry of TAMRA labelled cell penetrating peptides in both Caco-2 and HeLa cells lines at concentrations between 500nM and 2µM. Concentrations above 1µM exhibited higher final intracellular concentrations, yet the measured diffusion coefficients were similarly independent of extracellular concentration. Both peptides appeared to enter the cell quickly with a fast initial uptake over the first 10 minutes, reaching a concentration maxima after 30 minutes.Overall, the study reveals that many published studies may be incorrect as they may only be reporting the presence of a fluorescent dye inside the cell not the peptide. The fast binding of the peptide to the membrane is likely to cause false positive results when traditionally studying internalisation kinetics such as using flow cytometry and confocal microscopy. Correlation spectroscopy techniques such as FCS, provide useful information on internalisation of the peptides, but the single spot measurement is limited when providing information on the entire cell. RICS is a progression of correlation spectroscopy and provides a more representative picture of the cell.
-------------------------------------

10017183_234 - 0.957431271072 - medicine
[patient, malassezia, seborrhoeic, colonization, dermatitis]

Association between Malassezia furfur colonization and seborrhoeic dermatitis in AIDS patients.
A total of 180 HIV-positive patients were assessed for seborrhoeic dermatitis (SD) and colonization with Malassezia species. Diseased skin of patients with seborrhoeic dermatitis were sampled selectively for Malassezia. In patients without SD, uninvolved skin was sampled. The prevalence of SD was 19%. Of the 34 SD patients, 16 were positive for Malassezia. Of the 146 patients without SD, only 27 were culture positive for Malassezia. Analysis of the largest HIV-positive patient population studied thus far yielded only a weak correlation between SD and Malassezia colonization.
-------------------------------------

10008551_234 - 0.705414016664 - technology_and_computing
[model, circuit, process, e-band, amplifier, gaa, performance, phemt]

Transmit and Receive Amplifiers for E-band Communications Systems Using GaAs pHEMT Technology
Measured performance is given for a transmit and a received amplifier MMIC fabricated using the WIN Semiconductor pp10 GaAs pHEMT process in the band 71 to 76 GHz. Small signal circuit measurements are compared with 'first cut' transistor and circuit models and demonstrate reasonable correlation. Model developments are currently underway to assess improvements to simulated data. Initial measured performance indicates that this process is suitable for applications to E-band offering the potential for highly integrated affordable chipsets.
-------------------------------------

10018297_234 - 0.904218245489 - science
[cell, inflammation, immune, molecule, costimulatory, specific, late]

Is it wise to target the late costimulatory molecule OX40 as a therapeutic target?
The immune response triggered following pathogen recognition, though required to clear the infection, can be detrimental if it is produced in excess or fails to resolve promptly. Excessive inflammation contributes to infectious and noninfectious pathologies in the gut (such as inflammatory bowel disease), lung (such as bronchiolitis), and in a variety of autoimmune conditions. T cells contribute significantly to pathology during inflammation. Global anti-inflammatory strategies can alleviate the consequences of exuberant inflammation by suppressing T cell activity, but may leave the patient vulnerable to opportunistic infection. More specific therapies aim to suppress only those T cells involved in the disease process, and one such approach is to target late costimulatory molecules. These are not expressed on naïve or resting memory cells. Rather, they have a specific window of expression and their ligation results in the production of abundant inflammatory cytokines. By targeting these molecules, it is hoped that inflammation will reduce, but that therapies will be specific enough to avoid, global immune suppression. This review focuses on the late costimulatory molecule OX40, compare it with other T cell costimulators, and highlight why it is a more suitable target for immune intervention than other immune suppressive strategies.
-------------------------------------

10008767_234 - 0.824667072034 - medicine
[voriconazole, anidulafungin, treatment, mic, strain]

Combination of Voriconazole and Anidulafungin for Treatment of Triazole-Resistant Aspergillus fumigatus in an In Vitro Model of Invasive Pulmonary Aspergillosis.
Voriconazole is a first-line agent for the treatment of invasive pulmonary aspergillosis. Isolates with elevated voriconazole MICs are increasingly being seen, and the optimal treatment regimen is not defined. We investigated whether the combination of voriconazole with anidulafungin may be beneficial for the treatment of A. fumigatus strains with elevated voriconazole MICs. We used an in vitro model of the human alveolus to define the exposure-response relationships for a wild-type strain (voriconazole MIC, 0.5 mg/liter) and strains with defined molecular mechanisms of triazole resistance (MICs, 4 to 16 mg/liter). All strains had anidulafungin minimum effective concentrations (MECs) of 0.0078 mg/liter. Exposure-response relationships were estimated using galactomannan as a biomarker. Concentrations of voriconazole and anidulafungin were measured using high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC). The interaction of voriconazole and anidulafungin was described using the Greco model. Fungal growth was progressively inhibited with higher drug exposures of voriconazole. Strains with elevated voriconazole MICs required proportionally greater voriconazole exposures to achieve a comparable antifungal effect. Galactomannan concentrations were only marginally reduced by anidulafungin monotherapy. An additive effect between voriconazole and anidulafungin was apparent. In conclusion, the addition of anidulafungin does not markedly alter the exposure-response relationship of voriconazole. A rise in serum galactomannan during combination therapy with voriconazole and anidulafungin should be interpreted as treatment failure and not attributed to a paradoxical reaction related to echinocandin treatment.
-------------------------------------

10012761_234 - 0.734098031949 - science
[leptin, crp, level, adiposity, measure, resistance, subject]

Epidemiological evidence against a role for C-reactive protein causing leptin resistance.
OBJECTIVE: It has been suggested that elevated levels of C-reactive protein (CRP) might interfere with leptin signalling and contribute to leptin resistance. Our aim was to assess whether plasma levels of CRP influence leptin resistance in humans; and our hypothesis was that CRP levels would modify the cross-sectional relationships between leptin and measures of adiposity. DESIGN AND METHODS: We assessed 4 measures of adiposity: body mass index, waist circumference, fat mass, and % body fat in 2113 British Regional Heart Study (BRHS) men (mean (SD) age 69 (5) years), with replication in 760 (age 69 (6) years) European Male Aging Study (EMAS) subjects. RESULTS: In BRHS subjects leptin correlated with CRP (Spearman's r=0.22, p<0.0001). Leptin and CRP correlated with all 4 measures of adiposity (r-value range: 0.22 to 0.57, all p<0.0001). Age-adjusted mean levels for adiposity measures increased in relation to leptin levels; but CRP level did not consistently influence the β coefficients of the regression lines in a CRP-stratified analysis. In BRHS subjects, the BMI vs. leptin relationship demonstrated a weak statistical interaction with CRP (p=0.04). We observed no similar interaction in EMAS subjects, and no significant interactions with other measures of adiposity in BRHS or EMAS cohorts. CONCLUSION: We have shown that plasma CRP has little influence on the relationship between measures of adiposity and serum leptin levels in these middle-aged and elderly male European cohorts. This study provides epidemiological evidence against CRP having a significant role in causing leptin resistance.
-------------------------------------

10005625_234 - 0.86853242006 - medicine
[attender, chronic, bowel, syndrome, irritable, abdominal, symptom]

Outpatients with irritable bowel syndrome: a comparison of first time and chronic attenders.
Fifty two chronic clinic attenders with irritable bowel syndrome were compared with 97 newly referred patients in respect of physical symptoms and psychiatric status. Profound differences between the two groups emerged. Many abdominal and non-colonic symptoms were perceived as much more severe in chronic attenders compared with first time attenders (p less than 0.0001 for abdominal pain and abdominal distension). Chronic attenders were much more likely to complain of constant symptoms (p less than 0.05), and the social consequences of their illness were much more striking (p less than 0.0001). There was, however, no difference in the prevalence of psychiatric morbidity in the two groups. Clinical trials and other investigations of the irritable bowel syndrome are usually conducted on hospital outpatient populations. The results of this study indicate that the patient populations used for these purposes need to be carefully defined.
-------------------------------------

10003669_234 - 0.756576873913 - medicine
[care, ward, nurse, programme, patient]

Nurses' attitudes to patient activation.
Levels of engagement of patients in rehabilitation activities in elderly care wards tend to be low, despite evidence that activity improves functional recovery. Since most patients in such wards spend their day in the direct care of nurses, an activation programme was established in a Liverpool elderly care unit. Informally, nurses expressed general feelings of satisfaction with the programme, but some disquiet was also noted. A survey of their attitudes towards the patient activation programme was therefore undertaken. No significant differences were found between the attitudes of nurses according to grade or between experimental and control wards, but a significant difference was noted between each of the four wards when regarded as independent variables. These findings suggest the need for 'ownership' of developments in rehabilitation care.
-------------------------------------

10003588_234 - 0.836990996828 - technology_and_computing
[algorithm, ilc, convergence, control, batch, input]

A Convergence Analysis of D-ILC Algorithm
ILC is an emerging technique for learning control. The D-ILC algorithm is the generic ILC scheme which captures the error trend of a batch to update the control input for the next batch or batches. The 2-dimensional nature requires in-depth convergence analysis of the algorithm. This paper addresses these issues in detail. This paper deals with the convergence properties of ILC algorithms with emphasis on control input. Discrete-time linear state space representation of a linear time-invariant system has been considered along with usual assumptions which ensure D-type ILC algorithm converges in terms of output error. The convergence for control input sequence is investigated up to component level.
-------------------------------------

10007065_234 - 0.87684746803 - science
[esophageal, hpv, squamous, carcinoma, cell, ci, association, type, subject, antibody]

InterSCOPE study: Associations between esophageal squamous cell carcinoma and human papillomavirus serological markers.
BACKGROUND: The role of human papillomavirus (HPV) in the causation of esophageal squamous cell carcinoma is unclear. We examined the associations between esophageal squamous cell carcinoma and 28 centrally measured HPV serological markers in serum from six existing case-control studies conducted in regions with differing background risks of esophageal cancer. METHODS: We used centralized multiplex serology to test serum samples from 1561 case subjects and 2502 control subjects from six case-control studies for antibodies to the major HPV capsid protein (L1) and/or the early proteins E6 and/or E7 of eight high-risk, two low-risk, and four cutaneous HPV types. Study-specific odds ratios (ORs) and corresponding 95% confidence intervals (CIs) were estimated using conditional logistic regression with adjustment for smoking, alcohol consumption, and other potential confounders. Pooled odds ratios and 95% confidence intervals were calculated using either a linear mixed-effects approach or a joint fixed-effects approach. All statistical tests were two-sided. RESULTS: We found statistically significant associations between esophageal squamous cell carcinoma and antibodies to E6 for HPV16 (OR = 1.89, 95% CI = 1.09 to 3.29, P = .023) and HPV6 (OR = 2.53, 95% CI = 1.51 to 4.25, P < .001) but not for other tested HPV types. There were no statistically significant associations between esophageal squamous cell carcinoma and antibodies to E7 for any of the tested HPV types. Simultaneous seropositivity for HPV16 E6 and E7 was rare (four case subjects, two control subjects; OR = 5.57, 95% CI = 0.90 to 34.35; P = .064). We also found statistically significant associations between esophageal squamous cell carcinoma and capsid antibodies for the high-risk mucosal type HPV33 L1 (OR = 1.30, 95% CI = 1.00 to 1.69; P = .047) and the low-risk mucosal types HPV6 (OR = 1.22, 95% CI = 1.05 to 1.42; P = .010) and HPV11 (OR = 1.30, 95% CI = 1.09 to 1.56, P = .0036). CONCLUSIONS: We found limited serological evidence of an association between esophageal squamous cell carcinoma and HPV in the populations studied. Although HPV does not appear to be an important risk factor for esophageal squamous cell carcinoma, we cannot exclude the possibility that certain HPV types may be involved in a small subset of cancers.
-------------------------------------

10007502_234 - 0.904611647036 - medicine
[gefitinib, egfr, patient, nsclc, chemotherapy, study]

Gefitinib for the treatment of non-small-cell lung cancer.
IMPORTANCE OF THE FIELD: The epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is a leading target for treatment of non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Recent trials of the small-molecule EGFR inhibitor gefitinib have now more clearly defined indications for usage, and clinical and molecular factors predictive of benefit. AREAS COVERED IN THIS REVIEW: A systematic search of the literature (Medline, ASCO, WCLC meeting abstracts) was performed from January 2000 to January 2010. The Phase III INTEREST study found gefitinib in unselected, pretreated patients was not inferior to docetaxel chemotherapy in overall survival, offering improved quality of life and superior toxicity profile. The Phase III IPASS study demonstrated improved progression-free survival with gefitinib compared with paclitaxel-carboplatin chemotherapy in chemotherapy-naive, never/light ex-smokers with adenocarcinoma histology. Stratifying for EGFR mutation revealed mutation-positive patients had superior outcomes with gefitinib compared with chemotherapy. Subsequent studies (WJOG4305, NEJ002), selecting only EGFR mutation-positive patients prospectively confirm this finding. WHAT THE READER WILL GAIN: The profile of gefitinib and landmark trials in NSCLC are summarized. How biomarkers may further optimize therapeutic benefit is highlighted. TAKE HOME MESSAGE: Gefitinib is expected to have an important impact on management of pretreated and selected chemotherapy-naive patients with advanced NSCLC. In addition, activating EGFR mutations are proven to be of value for prediction of those who will derive most benefit.
-------------------------------------

10005269_234 - 0.92881639448 - science
[biomaterial, fibroblast, fibronectin, attachment, derivative, cell, novel]

Shear-aggregated fibronectin with anti-adhesive properties.
Biomaterials based on proteins, such as fibronectin, have the potential to guide cell and tissue behaviour during healing as a function of their unique mechanical and bioactive properties. Fibronectin has been reported as a scaffold for attachment of fibroblasts and subsequent deposition of collagen. We have recently developed a derivative process of shear-aggregated fibronectin that prevents cell attachment without causing cell death. This has potential applications in clinical situations where adhesions form across gliding surfaces and cause loss of function, e.g. peritoneal or flexor tendon adhesions. This in vitro study tested this derivative fibronectin biomaterial and its effects on aggressive adhesion-forming cells, using rabbit flexor tendon synovial fibroblasts. We investigated degradation of the novel biomaterial, and attachment of fibroblasts to glass coated with the biomaterial, relative to fibroblast attachment to uncoated and fibronectin-coated glass. We assessed infiltration of the derivative fibronectin biomaterial by fibroblasts and cytotoxicity of the biomaterial to fibroblasts. The interaction between fibroblasts and the derivative fibronectin biomaterial was visualized using time-lapse photography. The derivative fibronectin biomaterial dissolved by 88% of its mass by 3 weeks. Fibroblast attachment to the novel biomaterial was significantly reduced at 6 h. After 24 h of exposure to the novel biomaterial, fibroblasts did not migrate into it, there was no cell death and no attachment was seen using time-lapse. This novel derivative fibronectin biomaterial combines inhibition of fibroblast attachment with barrier effects and has suitable mechanical properties for surgical use in preventing adhesions in vivo.
-------------------------------------

10007412_234 - 0.701712568003 - science
[pulsar, gamma-ray, frequency, psr, time, j0106, method]

Discovery of Nine Gamma-Ray Pulsars in Fermi Large Area Telescope Data Using a New Blind Search Method
We report the discovery of nine previously unknown gamma-ray pulsars ina blind search of data from the Fermi Large Area Telescope (LAT). Thepulsars were found with a novel hierarchical search method originallydeveloped for detecting continuous gravitational waves from rapidlyrotating neutron stars. Designed to find isolated pulsars spinning at upto kHz frequencies, the new method is computationally efficient andincorporates several advances, including a metric-based gridding of thesearch parameter space (frequency, frequency derivative, and skylocation) and the use of photon probability weights. The nine pulsarshave spin frequencies between 3 and 12 Hz, and characteristic agesranging from 17 kyr to 3 Myr. Two of them, PSRs J1803-2149 and J2111+4606, are young and energetic Galactic-plane pulsars (spin-down powerabove 6 {\times} 10$^{35}$ erg s$^{-1}$ and ages below 100kyr). The seven remaining pulsars, PSRs J0106+4855, J0622+3749,J1620-4927, J1746-3239, J2028+3332, J2030+4415, and J2139+4716, areolder and less energetic; two of them are located at higher Galacticlatitudes (|b| {\gt} 10{\deg}). PSR J0106+4855 has the largestcharacteristic age (3 Myr) and the smallest surface magnetic field (2{\times} 10$^{11}$ G) of all LAT blind-search pulsars. PSRJ2139+4716 has the lowest spin-down power (3 {\times} 10$^{33}$ ergs$^{-1}$) among all non-recycled gamma-ray pulsars ever found.Despite extensive multi-frequency observations, only PSR J0106+4855 hasdetectable pulsations in the radio band. The other eight pulsars belongto the increasing population of radio-quiet gamma-ray pulsars.
-------------------------------------

10008598_234 - 0.795410229464 - science
[cell, mouse, lymph, node, oxazolone, pyroninophilic]

Antigen-specific and non-specific depression of proliferative responses induced during contact sensitivity in mice.
Exposure of the flank of mice to either oxazolone or trinitrochlorobenzene (TNCB) 5 days prior to the application of oxazolone on the ear resulted in a reduced capacity of oxazolone-induced draining lymph node cells to express IL-2 receptors, produce IL-2, protein, RNA and DNA. However, histological examination of the draining lymph node suggest that antigen-specific and antigen-non-specific influences differ with respect to the frequency of pyroninophilic cells. Pre-exposure to oxazolone suppressed the number of oxazolone-induced pyroninophilic T cell blasts, whereas draining lymph nodes from TNCB-pretreated mice contained significantly more pyroninophilic cells than from oxazolone-pretreated mice. However, the majority of these cells were incorporating little or no thymidine. Thus exposure to certain contact sensitizers induces at least two systemic control mechanisms which serve to regulate subsequent lymphoproliferative responses. These mechanisms appear to exert their influences at different stages of in-vivo T cell activation.
-------------------------------------

10011640_234 - 0.886196589955 - science
[inclusion, synuclein, formation, gene, disease, ??]

C. elegans Model Identifies Genetic Modifiers of α-Synuclein Inclusion Formation During Aging
Inclusions in the brain containing ??-synuclein are the pathological hallmark of Parkinson's disease, but how these inclusions are formed and how this links to disease is poorly understood. We have developed a C. elegans model that makes it possible to monitor, in living animals, the formation of ??-synuclein inclusions. In worms of old age, inclusions contain aggregated ??-synuclein, resembling a critical pathological feature. We used genome-wide RNA interference to identify processes involved in inclusion formation, and identified 80 genes that, when knocked down, resulted in a premature increase in the number of inclusions. Quality control and vesicle-trafficking genes expressed in the ER/Golgi complex and vesicular compartments were overrepresented, indicating a specific role for these processes in ??-synuclein inclusion formation. Suppressors include aging-associated genes, such as sir-2.1/SIRT1 and lagr-1/LASS2. Altogether, our data suggest a link between ??-synuclein inclusion formation and cellular aging, likely through an endomembrane-related mechanism. The processes and genes identified here present a framework for further study of the disease mechanism and provide candidate susceptibility genes and drug targets for Parkinson's disease and other ??-synuclein related disorders.?? 2008 van Ham et al.
-------------------------------------

10008623_234 - 0.867359748364 - science
[irritant, response, skin, epidermal]

Investigation of TNF-alpha release as a measure of skin irritancy.
Contact dermatitis is by far the most frequently reported occupational disease, with irritant dermatitis accounting for up to 80% of all cases. A wide variety of materials are capable of causing skin inflammation including soaps, cosmetics, pesticides, organic dyes, solvents and industrial chemicals and wastes. Skin irritation results from a complex series of events involving the development of an inflammatory response at the site of exposure. Cytokines are a family of proteins and glycoproteins that regulate immune and inflammatory responses; many are produced by epidermal cells. The present study examines the response of mouse epidermal strips to the cutaneous irritant sodium dodecyl sulphate (SDS). A time-dependent relationship was established for the release of the cytokine tumour necrosis factor-alpha, from epidermal keratinocytes after treatment with 20% SDS. The potential value of this methodology for the detection of cutaneous irritants has been established. The utility of the approach for the identification in vitro of other materials of known in vivo irritant potential will be investigated.
-------------------------------------

10018385_234 - 0.785410728753 - medicine
[infection, bcg, lung, eosinophilia, response, cryptococcus]

Prior exposure to live Mycobacterium bovis BCG decreases Cryptococcus neoformans-induced lung eosinophilia in a gamma interferon-dependent manner.
Some common childhood infections appear to prevent the development of atopy and asthma. In some Mycobacterium bovis BCG-vaccinated populations, strong delayed-type hypersensitivity responses to mycobacterial antigens are associated with a reduced risk of atopy. Although BCG exposure decreases allergen-induced lung eosinophilia in animal models, little attention has been given to the effect of immunity to BCG on responses against live pathogens. We used the murine Cryptococcus neoformans infection model to investigate whether prior BCG infection can alter such responses. The present study shows that persistent pulmonary BCG infection of C57BL/6 mice induced an increase in gamma interferon, a reduction in interleukin-5, and a decrease in lung eosinophilia during subsequent Cryptococcus infection. This effect was long lasting, depended on the presence of live bacteria, and required persistence of mycobacterial infection in the lung. Reduction of eosinophilia was less prominent after infection with a mutant BCG strain (DeltahspR), which was rapidly cleared from the lungs. These observations have important implications for the development of vaccines designed to prevent Th2-mediated disease and indicate that prior lung BCG vaccination can alter the pattern of subsequent host inflammation.
-------------------------------------

10005294_234 - 0.796528291508 - science
[sedimentary, study, visean, carboniferous, thick, aim]

SEDIMENTOLOGY OF THE LOWER CARBONIFEROUS IN SOUTH-WESTERN LIBYA
Several hydrocarbon discoveries in the Marar Formation (Tournaisian and Viséan) were recently made in the Lower Carboniferous strata of the Ghadames and Murzuq Basins situated in SW Libya. Despite large exposures exhibiting thick sections, there is an absence of regional studies focusing on this stratigraphic interval and only rare case studies provide new sedimentary data. More generally, geological knowledge of Carboniferous in North Africa (Saharan Platform) is also understudied when compare to other regions of the world. Detail analyses of the sedimentary record on Saharan Platform may noticeably contribute to refine the current understanding of global geological episodes such as the Late Paleozoic Ice Age.The main aim of this study is to produce valuable field data for both industry and interpretations for assessing academic hypothesis. In order to develop accurate and detail correlations of sedimentary strata over long distances (over 350 km) a primary aims is to define a synchronous key marker horizon that is ideally detectable in both surface and subsurface datasets. A secondary aim is to characterise spatial variability and geometries of sedimentary bodies.Acquired during three fieldwork seasons in the area (along ca 385 km), over 4800 m of sedimentary logging, facies analyses and 800 outcrop gamma ray readings are compiled in this study. I therefore characterise the micro, meso, macro-scale geometries, regional distribution, gamma ray response and mineralogy of the Collenia stromatolites that mark the uppermost part of the Marar Formation. Mainly based on series of detailed sedimentary logging and photographic panoramas, two types of reservoirs facies are described: 1- several metres thick shorefaces sandstones that are continuous for several tens of kilometres; 2- several tens of metres thick incised valley in filled with fluvial sandstones of fewer lateral extend. A sea level curve, produced on basis of the detailed sequence stratigraphic framework of the area, reveals that eustasy almost solely explains relative changes of sea level during the Viséan. Considering the glacial record preserved on northern Gondwana during the same interval, we conclude that the onset of the Late Paleozoic Ice Age is older than uppermost Viséan and more gradual than previously thought.
-------------------------------------

10002321_234 - 0.802485986531 - science
[pressure, quinonoid, effect, intermediate, formation, ph, mpa, mol, reaction, rate]

Evidence of Preorganization in Quinonoid Intermediate Formation from l-Trp in H463F Mutant Escherichia coli Tryptophan Indole-lyase from Effects of Pressure and pH.
The effects of pH and hydrostatic pressure on the reaction of H463F tryptophan indole-lyase (TIL) have been evaluated. The mutant TIL shows very low activity for elimination of indole but is still competent to form a quinonoid intermediate from l-tryptophan Phillips, R. S., Johnson, N., and Kamath, A. V. (2002) Biochemistry 41, 4012-4019. Stopped-flow measurements show that the formation of the quinonoid intermediate at 505 nm is affected by pH, with a bell-shaped dependence for the forward rate constant, k(f), and dependence on a single basic group for the reverse rate constant, k(r), with the following values: pK(a1) = 8.14 ± 0.15, pK(a2) = 7.54 ± 0.15, k(f,min) = 18.1 ± 1.3 s(-1), k(f,max) = 179 ± 46.3 s(-1), k(r,min) = 11.4 ± 1.2 s(-1), and k(r,max) = 33 ± 1.6 s(-1). The pH effects may be due to ionization of Tyr74 as the base and Cys298 as the acid influencing the rate constant for deprotonation. High-pressure stopped-flow measurements were performed at pH 8, which is the optimum for the forward reaction. The rate constants show an increase with pressure up to 100 MPa and a subsequent decrease above 100 MPa. Fitting the pressure data gives the following values: k(f,0) = 15.4 ± 0.8 s(-1), ΔV(⧧) = -29.4 ± 2.9 cm(3) mol(-1), and Δβ(⧧) = -0.23 ± 0.03 cm(3) mol(-1) MPa(-1) for the forward reaction, and k(r,0) = 20.7 ± 0.8 s(-1), ΔV(⧧) = -9.6 ± 2.3 cm(3) mol(-1), and Δβ(⧧) = -0.05 ± 0.02 cm(3) mol(-1) MPa(-1) for the reverse reaction. The primary kinetic isotope effect on quinonoid intermediate formation at pH 8 is small (∼2) and is not significantly pressure-dependent, suggesting that the effect of pressure on k(f) may be due to perturbation of an active site preorganization step. The negative activation volume is also consistent with preorganization of the ES complex prior to quinonoid intermediate formation, and the negative compressibility may be due to the effect of pressure on the enzyme conformation. These results support the conclusion that the preorganization of the H463F TIL Trp complex, which is probably dominated by motion of the l-Trp indole moiety of the aldimine complex, contributes to quinonoid intermediate formation.
-------------------------------------

10003613_234 - 0.703701226787 - science
[injury, tubal, thermal, occult, detection, woman, rrso]

Diathermy-induced injury may affect detection of occult tubal lesions at risk-reducing salpingo-oophorectomy.
BACKGROUND: Electrosurgery-induced tubal thermal injury obscures cellular detail and hampers histomorphological assessment for occult pathology. OBJECTIVE: The objectives of this study were to report on diathermy-related thermal injuries to the fallopian tube observed at RRSO and explore its potential impact on the detection of occult tubal epithelial lesions. DESIGN: This study was composed of high-risk women from breast and/or ovarian cancer families attending a tertiary high-risk familial gynecologic cancer clinic. This was a retrospective case-control analysis of high-risk women who underwent RRSO. Cases were all women detected to have occult lesions (tubal atypia/carcinoma in situ/cancer) between January 2005 and December 2010. Control subjects were all women with normal tubal/ovarian histology between August 2006 and December 2007. METHODS: Two pathologists performed histopathologic assessment for grade of thermal injury. Tubal diathermy injury rates were compared between cases and controls. Statistical analysis was undertaken using SPSS version 18. The Mann-Whitney U test compared age distributions; χ/Fisher tests, the difference between proportions, and γ test, the difference in ordinal variables between the groups. RESULTS: A novel tubal thermal index to describe the severity of injury is reported. Lack of fimbrial thermal injury is twice as likely (odds ratio, 2.04; 95% confidence interval, 1.06-3.92) to be associated with detection of occult tubal pathology, whereas isthmic injury does not affect detection rate (P = 0.744). The groups were comparable with respect to age at RRSO (P = 0.531) and the presence of BRCA mutations (P = 0.192). CONCLUSIONS: This report highlights the potential impact of electrosurgical thermal injury on detection of occult tubal pathology following RRSO. It is important for surgeons to avoid thermal injury to the distal end of the tube.
-------------------------------------

10017780_234 - 0.77161576653 - science
[haqp1, blocker, human, novel]

Discovery of Novel Human Aquaporin-1 Blockers
Human aquaporin-1 (hAQP1) is a water channel found in many tissues and potentially involved in several human pathologies. Selective inhibitors of hAQP1 are discussed as novel treatment opportunities for glaucoma, brain edema, inflammatory pain, and certain types of cancer. However, only very few potent and chemically attractive blockers have been reported to date. In this study we present three novel hAQP1 blockers that have been identified by virtual screening and inhibit water flux through hAQP1 in Xenopus laevis oocyte swelling assays at low micromolar concentrations. The newly discovered compounds display no chemical similarity to hitherto known hAQP1 blockers and bind at the extracellular entrance of the channel, close to the ar/R selectivity filter. Futhermore, mutagenesis studies showed that Lys36, which is not conserved among the hAQP family, is crucially involved in binding and renders the discovered compounds suitable as leads for the development of selective hAQP1 inhibitors.
-------------------------------------

10007824_234 - 0.738814091201 - science
[soil]

Does prescribed burning on peat soils influence DOC concentrations in soil and runoff waters? Results from a 10 year chronosequence
Times Cited: 0
-------------------------------------

10011960_234 - 0.700042343508 - medicine
[respiratory, ppra, reactivity, dpra, sensitizer, allergen, peptide]

Reactivity of Chemical Respiratory Allergens in the Peroxidase Peptide Reactivity Assay.
Sensitizing chemicals are commonly associated primarily with either skin or respiratory sensitization. In the Direct Peptide Reactivity Assay (DPRA), when compared with skin sensitizers, respiratory allergens have been demonstrated to selectively react with lysine rather than cysteine. The Peroxidase Peptide Reactivity Assay (PPRA) has been developed as a refinement to the DPRA. The PPRA incorporates dose-response analyses, mass spectroscopy for peptide detection and a horseradish peroxidase-hydrogen peroxide enzymatic system, increasing the potential to identify pro-haptens. In the investigations reported here, the PPRA was evaluated to determine whether it provides advantages for the identification of respiratory allergens. Twenty respiratory sensitizers, including five predicted to be pre-/pro-haptens were evaluated. The PPRA performed similarly to the DPRA with respect to indentifying inherently reactive respiratory sensitizers. However, three respiratory sensitizers predicted to be pre-/pro-haptens (chlorhexidine, ethylenediamine and piperazine) were non-reactive and the general selectivity of the respiratory allergens for lysine was lost in the PPRA. Overall, the data indicate that the PPRA does not provide an advantage over the DPRA for discriminating allergens as either contact or respiratory sensitizers. Nevertheless, the PPRA provides a number of refinements to the DPRA that allow for an enhanced characterization of reactivity for both classes of chemical allergens.
-------------------------------------

10014926_234 - 0.936487603929 - science
[imine, activity, dynamic, reductase, combinatorial]

A dynamic combinatorial screen for novel imine reductase activity
New imine reductase activity has been discovered in the anaerobic bacterium Acetobacterium woodii by screening a dynamic combinatorial library of virtual imine substrates, using a biphasic water???tetradecane solvent system.
-------------------------------------

10005206_234 - 0.874799392262 - science
[texture, vortex, superfluid, rotation, omega, state, 3he-a, velocity, chirality, slab]

Chirality in Superfluid 3He-A
We have used torsional oscillators, containing disk-shaped slabs of superfluid 3He-A, to probe the chiral orbital textures created by cooling into the superfluid state while continuously rotating. Comparing the observed flow-driven textural transitions with numerical simulations of possible textures shows that an oriented monodomain texture with l antiparallel to the angular velocity Omega_0 is left behind after stopping rotation. The bias towards a particular chirality, while in the vortex state, is due to the inequivalence of energies of vortices of opposite circulation. When spun-up from rest, the critical velocity for vortex nucleation depends on the sense of rotation, Omega, relative to that of l. A different type of vorticity, apparently linked to the slab's rim by a domain wall, appears when Omega is parallel to l.
-------------------------------------

10017030_234 - 0.762927416336 - medicine
[sub-syndrome, symptom, dementia, month, factor, neuropsychiatric, time, stability, psychological, study]

Investigating the stability of neuropsychiatric sub-syndromes with progression of dementia: a 2-year prospective study.
OBJECTIVES: Previous studies have identified sub-syndromes of behavioral and psychological symptoms of dementia. But because of their cross-sectional design, the stability of these sub-syndromes over time remains unknown. METHOD: Behavioral and psychological symptoms of dementia of 84 participants (out of an original sample of 144 patients) with Alzheimer's disease and vascular dementia were assessed by using the Neuropsychiatric Inventory every six months for two years. Principal component factor analysis with Varimax rotation was used to detect neuropsychiatric sub-syndromes at each time point. RESULTS: The 12 symptoms were reduced to four factors at baseline, 12, 18, and 24 months and three factors at six months. None of the factor structures matched the four sub-syndromes previously identified by studies. The most stable group of symptoms were a combination of "psychosis" and "hyperactivity" symptoms (delusions, hallucinations, irritability, agitation), which became stable at 18 months. CONCLUSIONS: The pattern of behavioral and psychological symptoms of dementia sub-syndromes over time has not been studied before, and this research suggests that some stability is evident particularly during the later stages of the disease process. These findings have implications for patients and their caregiver. Copyright © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
-------------------------------------

10008301_234 - 0.737386507897 - science
[temporal, lobe, rostral, connectivity]

Convergent Connectivity and Graded Specialization in the Rostral Human Temporal Lobe as Revealed by Diffusion-Weighted Imaging Probabilistic Tractography
In recent years, multiple independent neuroscience investigations have implicated critical roles for the rostral temporal lobe in auditory and visual perception, language, and semantic memory. Although arising in the context of different cognitive functions, most of these suggest that there is a gradual convergence of sensory information in the temporal lobe that culminates in modality- and perceptually invariant representations at the most rostral aspect. Currently, however, too little is known regarding connectivity within the human temporal lobe to be sure of exactly how and where convergence occurs; existing hypotheses are primarily derived on the basis of cross-species generalizations from invasive nonhuman primate studies, the validity of which is unclear, especially where language function is concerned. In this study, we map the connectivity of the human rostral temporal lobe in vivo for the first time using diffusion-weighted imaging probabilistic tractography. The results indicate that convergence of sensory information in the temporal lobe is in fact a graded process that occurs along both its longitudinal and lateral axes and culminates in the most rostral limits. We highlight the consistency of our results with those of prior functional neuroimaging, computational modeling, and patient studies. By going beyond simple fasciculus reconstruction, we systematically explored the connectivity of specific temporal lobe areas to frontal and parietal language regions. In contrast to the graded within-temporal lobe connectivity, this intertemporal connectivity was found to dissociate across caudal, mid, and rostral subregions. Furthermore, we identified a basal rostral temporal region with very limited connectivity to areas outside the temporal lobe, which aligns with recent evidence that this subregion underpins the extraction of modality- and context-invariant semantic representations.
-------------------------------------

10010332_234 - 0.753197428601 - science
[pathway, design, tool, synthetic]

Computational tools for the synthetic design of biochemical pathways
As the field of synthetic biology is developing, the prospects for de novo design of biosynthetic pathways are becoming more and more realistic. Hence, there is an increasing need for computational tools that can support these efforts. A range of algorithms has been developed that can be used to identify all possible metabolic pathways and their corresponding enzymatic parts. These can then be ranked according to various properties and modelled in an organism-specific context. Finally, design software can aid the biologist in the integration of a selected pathway into smartly regulated transcriptional units. Here, we review key existing tools and offer suggestions for how informatics can help to shape the future of synthetic microbiology. ?? 2012 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved.
-------------------------------------

10016810_234 - 0.836530286047 - science
[protein, serum, expression, response, proteome, acute, mass, change, colon]

Analyses of intricate kinetics of the serum proteome during and after colon surgery by protein expression time series
Monitoring changes in serum protein expression in response to acute events such as trauma, infection or drug intervention may reveal key proteins of great value in predicting recovery or treatment response. Concerted actions of many proteins are expected. Proteins sharing similar expression changes may function in the same physiological process. As a model we analyzed expression changes in serum of colon cancer patients, before, during, and after laparoscopic colon resection. Eight samples were taken from each of four patients before, during, and up to 5 days after surgery. Total serum and a low molecular weight fraction were analyzed by {SELDI-TOF-MS.} In total 146 masses were detected. A principal components analysis {(PCA)} illustrates the temporal variation in the postsurgery proteome. Time series for each mass could be clustered into four distinct groups based on similarity in expression pattern. Two masses of 11.4 and 11.6 {kDa}, part of a slow response cluster, were identified as forms of the acute phase protein serum amyloid A {(SAA).} Fourteen more proteins belong to this cluster and may also function in acute phase response. We present an approach to analyze temporal variation in the proteome. This approach may be useful to evaluate surgical, nutritional, and pharmacological interventions. ?? 2007 {Wiley-VCH} Verlag {GmbH} \& Co. {KGaA.}
-------------------------------------

10007984_234 - 0.837151443978 - science
[binary, microlensing, perturbations, central, planet, ambiguity, interpretation, event, high-magnification, type]

A New Type of Ambiguity in the Planet and Binary Interpretations of Central Perturbations of High-magnification Gravitational Microlensing Events
DOI: 10.1088/0004-637X/756/1/48; eprintid: arXiv:1204.4789
-------------------------------------

10005598_234 - 0.901704752053 - medicine
[ispaghulum, placebo, bowel, patient, syndrome, transit, time, group, irritable]

Double blind study of ispaghula in irritable bowel syndrome.
A double blind placebo controlled trial of ispaghula husk in 80 patients with irritable bowel syndrome is reported. Global assessment judged treatment to be satisfactory in 82% of patients receiving ispaghula and 53% of the placebo group (p less than 0.02). Bowel habit was unchanged in the placebo group, while constipation significantly improved in patients taking ispaghula (p = 0.026). Transit time decreased significantly in those taking ispaghula compared with placebo (p = 0.001), especially in patients with initially high transit times. Abdominal pain and bloating improved in both groups, with no significant differences between ispaghula and placebo. Four of the eight withdrawals on ispaghula and 10 of the 15 withdrawals on placebo were because of treatment failure. Ispaghula significantly improves overall well being in patients with irritable bowel syndrome, and in those with constipation favourably affects bowel habit and transit time.
-------------------------------------

10010990_234 - 0.836567076611 - science
[anodic, formation, film, alloy, void, oxidation]

Anodic film growth on Al-Li-Cu alloy AA2099-T8
{AA2099-T8} aluminium alloy was anodized at a current density of 5 {mA/cm} 2 to selected voltages in 0.1 M ammonium pentaborate electrolyte at 293 K. It was found that the growth of barrier-type anodic film on the alloy was accompanied by oxidation of intermetallics, formation and rupture of oxygen gas-filled voids in the anodic film and healing of the anodic film at the sites of rupture. It was revealed that the formation of oxygen gas-filled voids was related to the oxidation of copper-rich nanoparticles in the copper-enriched layer at the film/alloy interface, and that the oxidation process of copper-rich nanoparticles depended on grain orientation. Further, the significantly reduced Pilling-Bedworth ratio for formation of anodic lithium oxide compared with that for formation of anodic alumina resulted in the formation of fine voids at the alloy/film interface and sequentially, detachment of the anodic film from the alloy surface. ?? 2012 Elsevier Ltd.
-------------------------------------

10015486_234 - 0.92864408677 - medicine
[nf2, patient, clinical, management, family, neurofibromatosis]

Management of the patient and family with neurofibromatosis 2: a consensus conference statement.
A consensus conference on neurofibromatosis 2 (NF2) was held in 2002 at the request of the United Kingdom (UK) Neurofibromatosis Association, with particular emphasis on vestibular schwannoma (VS) surgery. NF2 patients should be managed at specialty treatment centres, whose staff has extensive experience with the disease. All NF2 patients and their families should have access to genetic testing because presymptomatic diagnosis improves the clinical management of the disease. Some clinical manifestations of NF2, such as ocular abnormalities, can be detected in infancy; therefore, clinical screening for at-risk members of NF2 families can start at birth, with the first magnetic resonance (MRI) scan at 10-12 years of age. Minimal interference, maintenance of quality of life, and conservation of function or auditory rehabilitation are the cornerstones of NF2 management, and the decision points to achieve these goals for patients with different clinical presentations are discussed.
-------------------------------------

10008607_234 - 0.7598921626 - science
[factor, exposure, chemical, susceptibility, sensitization, change, allergic]

Household chemicals, immune function, and allergy: A commentary.
In recent decades, in the US and in Western and Northern Europe, there has been a significant increase in the prevalence of atopic allergic disease. Although that increase may now be slowing, or have already reached a plateau, there remains considerable interest in the factor or factors that may have caused this increased susceptibility to allergy and asthma. Certainly, the changes recorded have been too rapid to implicate a change in the gene pool, and for that reason attention has focused on the possible impact of environmental, dietary, and lifestyle factors. Although the hygiene hypothesis proposes that increased susceptibility to allergic sensitization is associated with changes in childhood exposure pathogenic microorganisms, other factors have been considered also. Among these is exposure to chemicals and atmospheric pollutants. There is some evidence that exposure to certain chemicals may elicit or exacerbate respiratory reactions in those who are already sensitized, or who already have existing airway disease. However, a recent article has proposed that exposure to specific household cleaning products may be one factor that is able to affect susceptibility to allergic sensitization. In the light of that article it is timely now to consider again the ability of chemical exposure to influence sensitization to common antigens.
-------------------------------------

10011027_234 - 0.754731004222 - science
[stability, carbonate, role, amorphous, ph, calcium, crystallization]

The role of pH and Mg on the stability and crystallization of amorphous calcium carbonate
cited By (since 1996) 1
-------------------------------------

10005641_234 - 0.8855095918 - medicine
[bowel, irritable, syndrome, patient, urological, prevalence, symptom, male, female]

High prevalence of irritable bowel syndrome in patients attending urological outpatient departments.
Irritable bowel syndrome patients often complain of urinary symptoms such as frequency, urgency, and dysuria, raising the possibility of inappropriate referral to the urologist. To resolve this issue, the prevalence of irritable bowel syndrome was compared in patients attending urological and control clinics (dermatology and ENT). The overall prevalence of irritable bowel syndrome was 31.2% in the urological clinic compared with 21.2% in the controls (P < 0.001), but striking, differences emerged, depending on presenting complaint. Irritable bowel symptoms were particularly common in patients presenting with loin pain (male: 40.9%, P = 0.004; female: 50%, P = 0.03), dysuria (male: 43.8%, P = 0.007; female: 46.2%, P = 0.01) and frequency/urgency (male: 31.7%, P = 0.002; female: 42.4%, P = 0.006), and the male/female prevalence was 24% and 44%. These results suggest that in irritable bowel syndrome, urinary symptoms including loin pain can present diagnostic dilemmas in both the gastroenterological and urological setting, underlining the importance of specialists in these fields working together in order to define better ways of managing such patients.
-------------------------------------

10011302_234 - 0.770477358825 - science
[fossil, organism, palaeontology, century]

From clergymen to computers: the advent of virtual palaeontology
Palaeontology was established as a science in the Victorian era, yet has roots that stretch deeper into the recesses of history. More than 2000 years ago, the Greek philosopher Aristotle deduced that fossil sea shells were once living organisms, and around 500 AD Xenophanes used fossils to argue that many areas of land must have previously been submarine. In 1027, the Persian scholar Avicenna suggested that organisms were fossilized by petrifying fluids; this theory was accepted by most natural philosophers up until the eighteenth century Enlightenment, and even beyond. The late 1700s were notable for the work of Georges Cuvier who established the reality of extinction. This, coupled with advances in the recognition of faunal successions made by the canal engineer William Smith, laid the framework for the discipline that would become known as palaeontology. As the nineteenth century progressed, the scientific community became increasingly well organized. Most fossil workers were gentleman scientists and members of the clergy, who self-funded their studies in a new and exciting field. Many of the techniques used to study fossils today were developed during this ‘classical’ period. Perhaps the most fundamental of these is to expose a fossil by splitting the rock housing it, and then conduct investigations based upon the exposed surface (Fig. 1). This approach has served the science well in the last two centuries, having been pivotal to innumerable advances in our understanding of the history of life. Nevertheless, there are many cases where splitting a rock in this way results in incomplete data recovery; those where the fossils are not flattened, but are preserved in three-dimensions. Even the ephemeral soft-tissues of organisms are occasionally preserved in a three-dimensional state, for example in the Herefordshire, La Voulte Sûr Rhone and Orsten ‘Fossil Lagerstätten’ (sites of exceptional fossil preservation). These rare and precious deposits provide a wealth of information about the history of life on Earth, and are perhaps our most important resource in the quest to understand the palaeobiology of extinct organisms. With the aid of twenty-first century technology, we can now make the most of these opportunities through the field of ‘virtual palaeontology’—computer-aided visualization of fossils
-------------------------------------

10007482_234 - 0.865412290255 - science
[ctc, epithelial, cell, iset, patient, nsclc, cellsearch, tumor, marker]

Analysis of circulating tumor cells in patients with non-small cell lung cancer using epithelial marker-dependent and -independent approaches.
INTRODUCTION: Epithelial circulating tumor cells (CTCs) are detectable in patients with non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). However, epithelial to mesenchymal transition, a widely reported prerequisite for metastasis, may lead to an underestimation of CTC number. We compared directly an epithelial marker-dependent (CellSearch) and a marker-independent (isolation by size of epithelial tumor cells ISET) technology platform for the ability to identify CTCs. Molecular characteristics of CTCs were also explored. METHODS: Paired peripheral blood samples were collected from 40 chemonäive, stages IIIA to IV NSCLC patients. CTCs were enumerated by Epithelial Cell Adhesion Molecule-based immunomagnetic capture (CellSearch, Veridex) and by filtration (ISET, RareCell Diagnostics). CTCs isolated by filtration were assessed by immunohistochemistry for epithelial marker expression (cytokeratins, Epithelial Cell Adhesion Molecule, epidermal growth factor receptor) and for proliferation status (Ki67). RESULTS: CTCs were detected using ISET in 32 of 40 (80%) patients compared with 9 of 40 (23%) patients using CellSearch. A subpopulation of CTCs isolated by ISET did not express epithelial markers. Circulating tumor microemboli (CTM, clusters of ≥ 3 CTCs) were observed in 43% patients using ISET but were undetectable by CellSearch. Up to 62% of single CTCs were positive for the proliferation marker Ki67, whereas cells within CTM were nonproliferative. CONCLUSIONS: Both technology platforms detected NSCLC CTCs. ISET detected higher numbers of CTCs including epithelial marker negative tumor cells. ISET also isolated CTM and permitted molecular characterization. Combined with our previous CellSearch data confirming CTC number as an independent prognostic biomarker for NSCLC, we propose that this complementary dual technology approach to CTC analysis allows more complete exploration of CTCs in patients with NSCLC.
-------------------------------------

10009827_234 - 0.791743084016 - science
[neutrophil, blastospore, amorolfine, addition, phagocytosis, effect]

Effect of amorolfine (Ro 14-4767/002) on in vitro phagocytosis and intracellular killing of Candida albicans by human neutrophils.
The effect of amorolfine (Ro 14-4767/002) on phagocytosis and intracellular killing of Candida albicans blastospores was determined in human neutrophil monolayer assays. At 0.2, 2 and 5 micrograms/ml amorolfine did not have any significant inhibitory or enhancing effect on phagocytosis whether following simultaneous addition of blastospores and drug to the neutrophils, prior treatment of neutrophils for 2 h before addition of blastospores or prior treatment of blastospores for 2 h. Simultaneous addition of amorolfine resulted in a significant increase in killing at all concentrations. This increase was not significantly enhanced by either preincubation of neutrophils or blastospores for 2 h with the drug.
-------------------------------------

10017408_234 - 0.795692551072 - technology_and_computing
[network, system, adaptive]

Emergence of hierarchical networks and polysynchronous behaviour in simple adaptive systems
We describe the dynamics of a simple adaptive network. The network architecture evolves to a number of disconnected components on which the dynamics is characterized by the possibility of differently synchronized nodes within the same network (polysynchronous states). These systems may have implications for the evolutionary emergence of polysynchrony and hierarchical networks in physical or biological systems modeled by adaptive networks.
-------------------------------------

10009120_234 - 0.84631279526 - science
[flowsheet, demethanizer, synthesis, process]

Synthesis and optimisation of demethaniser flowsheets for NGL recovery
A discussion on a demethanizer process, which was characterized by interactions between the complex distillation column and other flowsheet units, including the turbo-expander, flash units, multistream exchangers, and refrigeration system, covers a systematic approach for demethanizer flowsheet synthesis to generate cost-effective designs; a semi-rigorous boundary value method for the design of complex demethanizer columns for application within an optimization framework for process synthesis and evaluation; a simplified flowsheet simulation model based on shortcut models to account for various configurations and inter-connections in the demethanizer process; a methodology accounting for heat integration in multistream exchangers; a generalized superstructure for demethanizer flowsheet synthesis that includes various structural combinations in addition to the operational parameters; application of a stochastic optimization technique, simulated annealing, to optimize the superstructure and generate energy-efficient and cost-effective flowsheets; and a case study relevant to natural gas processing to apply the synthesis methodology. This is an abstract of a paper presented at the 2012 AIChE Spring National Meeting and 8th Global Congress on Process Safety (Houston, TX 4/1-5/2012).
-------------------------------------

10005287_234 - 0.815282431993 - medicine
[wound, larva, patient, debridement]

Therapeutic applications of the larvae for wound debridement.
It has been known for centuries that application of larvae is useful to heal certain wounds by facilitating debridement of necrotic tissue. Their therapeutic use was popularised in the beginning of the 19th century, but waned in the 1940s with the advent of antiseptic wound management and antibiotics. In more recent years, larvae are once again in vogue for management of difficult wounds. The mechanism of wound debridement by larvae includes the complete wound by continuous larval motion, secretion of proteolytic enzymes and antibacterial substances, effects on epidermal growth factor and interleukin-6 (IL-6) and ingestion and digestion of bacteria and necrotic tissue. In our study, wound debridement was achieved satisfactorily in 29 of 34 patients (85%) with chronic wounds. In the remaining five patients, failures occurred due to inadequate sealing in two patients (6%), death of larvae in two patients (6%) and treatment intolerance in one patient (3%). Larval therapy should be considered as a therapeutic option in the management of certain difficult wounds.
-------------------------------------

10008857_234 - 0.941507409032 - medicine
[patient, cancer, chemotherapy, cytokeratin, crc, tck18, pd, biomarker, ck18]

Multi-level evidence that circulating CK18 is a biomarker of tumour burden in colorectal cancer.
Background:Circulating total cytokeratin 18 (tCK18) and/or caspase cleaved cytokeratin 18 (cCK18) (measured by M65 and M30 enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (ELISAs), respectively) are used as pharmacodynamic (PD) biomarkers of epithelial cell death in clinical trials. Having validated these ELISAs, we assessed their utility in colorectal cancer (CRC).Methods:We applied the assays in several settings: 53 controls; 97 patients undergoing surgery and 74 patients with metastatic CRC undergoing chemotherapy (55 first line; 56 patients with repeated sampling through chemotherapy). Prognostic significance was evaluated using Kaplan-Meier life tables and Cox models; PD utility was assessed by analysis of repeated measures.Results:Median cCK18 and tCK18 levels were elevated in patients with cancer (both P=0.0001), and among cancer patients, there were increasing trends from early to advanced stages (both P(trends)=0.0001). Increasing tCK18 predicted for reduced survival after surgery with curative intent (adjusted hazard ratio (HR) for doubling in concentration 1.77, 95% CI: 1.04, 3.01) and after first-line chemotherapy in metastatic disease (adjusted HR per doubling in concentration=1.78, 95% CI: 1.37, 2.30). In patients with progressive disease during chemotherapy, repeated sampling revealed profiles with high baselines and progressive upwardly increases after cycle 1.Conclusion:This study provides evidence for cytokeratin 18 (CK18) as a prognostic and PD biomarker in patients with CRC and supports continued deployment of circulating CK18 in biomarker-enhanced trials.British Journal of Cancer advance online publication, 20 September 2012; doi:10.1038/bjc.2012.416www.bjcancer.com.
-------------------------------------

10003595_234 - 0.804387076531 - science
[cell, endothelium, etv2, hemogenic, hematopoiesis]

ETV2 expression marks blood and endothelium precursors, including hemogenic endothelium, at the onset of blood development.
BACKGROUND: ETV2 has been identified as an important player in embryonic hematopoiesis. However, the cell populations in which this transcription factor is expressed and operates during blood specification remain to be fully characterized. Here we address these issues using ES cells and a transgenic mouse line expressing green fluorescent protein (GFP) under the control of ETV2 regulatory elements, allowing us to observe the tight association between ETV2 expression and the initiation of hematopoiesis. RESULTS: Both in differentiating ES cells and gastrulating embryos ETV2::GFP is mostly found co-expressed with endothelial markers and defines a subset of cells with greatly enriched primitive erythroid potential. Upon culture ETV2::GFP cells rapidly up-regulate CD41, down-regulate endothelium cell surface markers and generate definitive hematopoietic progenitors. Altogether these characteristics represent the hallmark of hemogenic endothelium cells, a specialized endothelium originating from the hemangioblast and giving rise to hematopoietic cells. Importantly, ETV2 deficiency results in a complete absence of hemogenic endothelium in differentiating ES cells and gastrulating embryos. CONCLUSIONS: Altogether our data reveal that ETV2 marks hemogenic endothelium in gastrulating embryos and is absolutely required for the formation of this precursor at the onset of hematopoiesis. These results enhance our understanding of embryonic hematopoiesis and the factors driving hemogenic endothelium specification.
-------------------------------------

10005688_234 - 0.733958809315 - medicine
[disease, function, inflammatory, pulmonary, patient, bowel]

Pulmonary function in patients with inflammatory bowel disease.
Pulmonary function has been assessed in 36 outpatients with inflammatory bowel disease. The carbon monoxide transfer factor was found to be significantly reduced in patients as compared with matched controls (P less than 0.01). The reason for this reduction is not clear but it is unlikely to be due to sulfasalazine (Salazosulphapyridine).
-------------------------------------

10005312_234 - 0.9193942771 - science
[protein, polyelectrolyte, solution, fibroin, interaction, pectinase, binding, multilayer]

Thermodynamics of Biomacromolecular Interactions in Aqueous Solutions
An understanding of the interactions between polyelectrolytes and proteins is vital to determine structure and functionality of materials constructed of these two components. Possible applications for the protein-polyelectrolyte composites are ranging from materials used to deliver drugs to the methods of protein stabilisation for storage of therapeutics, biosemsors, and encapsulation of medicines for triggered release. The binding of globular proteins to the polyelectrolyte chains can prevent undesired protein aggregation and may help to extend the shelf-life of the protein-containing food. The aim of this project is to study the mechanism of non-covalent binding between proteins and polyelectrolytes, responsiveness of the proteinpolyelectrolyte composites to external stimuli such as changing pH, presence of salt of different types and concentrations or influence of enzyme on the integrity of protein-polyelectrolyte multilayer film.Our study was focused on the effects of different mono- and multivalent salts on binding affinitybetween a negatively charged polyelectrolyte - poly(styrene sulfonate) PSS and bovine serumalbumin BSA or myoglobin. The complex formation between these polymers was examinedusing the static light scattering (SLS), turbidimetric and potentiometric titrations, differentialscanning calorimetry (DSC) and theoretical studies based on molecular dynamics simulations. We established that the inter- and intramolecular interactions between proteins and polyelectrolytes are primarily driven by the electrostatic forces at the conditions when thepolymers are in low ionic strength solutions and attractive or repulsive relations are based upon the charge density and its distribution. When proteins are interacting with polyelectrolytes in solutions of high ionic strength the electrostatic interactions are screened by the salt originated co-ions. In these conditions there is a competition between salting-out effect on proteins leading to protein aggregation or protein-polyelectrolyte complex formation, which can prevent undesired protein-protein association. The forces driving the attractive interactions at high ionic strength are of non-electrostatic origin, these are mainly hydrophobic forces. The computer simulation study shows that more flexible polyanionic chains are stronger binders to the positive patches on protein surface than these of a more rigid backbone. Also a total energy of binding depends on a sum of electrostatic and non-electrostatic energies.The formation of multilayers composed of a protein and a polyelectrolyte, where componentswere: poly-L-lysine – a positively charged homopolypeptide and polygalacturonic acid - apolysaccharide was examined using a quartz crystal microbalance with dissipation monitoring. A 10 and 11 layer film, deposited on the charged surface, exhibited the linear growth pattern for first 5 layers and exponential growth for a flowing 5 (or 6) layers. The influence of pectinase enzyme on digesting the polygalacturonic acid component of the multilayer was most effective for 1 AU/mL concentration of pectinase. After the enzyme was applied the multilayer film was fully disintegrated within the period of 20 minutes for pectinase at 1 AU/mL and the time of disintegration was extended to 120 minutes for pectinase at 0.1 AU/mL.Silk fibroin aqueous solutions were tested rheologically for their structural properties involvingthe existence of fibroin aggregates. We examined the process of ageing of fibroin solutions and solid-liquid transformations taking place within the fluid. The transitions between viscous and elastic behaviour of the fibroin’s semi-dilute solutions were initiated by strain, shear frequency and temperature. We highlighted that the irreversible change in secondary structure of the silk fibroin in aqueous solutions are taking place after the 48 hour period of time since the preparation of protein fluids. We recommend that further processing of silk fibroin such aselectrospinning should be completed within the 48 hour after dissolution.
-------------------------------------

10005060_234 - 0.878903524812 - medicine
[imatinib, patient, group, good-risk, chemotherapy, survival, treatment, poor-risk, study, philadelphia-chromosome-positive]

Imatinib after induction for treatment of children and adolescents with Philadelphia-chromosome-positive acute lymphoblastic leukaemia (EsPhALL): a randomised, open-label, intergroup study
BACKGROUND: Trials of imatinib have provided evidence of activity in adults with Philadelphia-chromosome-positive acute lymphoblastic leukaemia (ALL), but the drug's role when given with multidrug chemotherapy to children is unknown. This study assesses the safety and efficacy of oral imatinib in association with a Berlin-Frankfurt-Munster intensive chemotherapy regimen and allogeneic stem-cell transplantation for paediatric patients with Philadelphia-chromosome-positive ALL. METHODS: Patients aged 1-18 years recruited to national trials of front-line treatment for ALL were eligible if they had t(9;22)(q34;q11). Patients with abnormal renal or hepatic function, or an active systemic infection, were ineligible. Patients were enrolled by ten study groups between 2004 and 2009, and were classified as good risk or poor risk according to early response to induction treatment. Good-risk patients were randomly assigned by a web-based system with permuted blocks (size four) to receive post-induction imatinib with chemotherapy or chemotherapy only in a 1:1 ratio, while all poor-risk patients received post-induction imatinib with chemotherapy. Patients were stratified by study group. The chemotherapy regimen was modelled on a Berlin-Frankfurt-Munster high-risk backbone; all received four post-induction blocks of chemotherapy after which they became eligible for stem-cell transplantation. The primary endpoints were disease-free survival at 4 years in the good-risk group and event-free survival at 4 years in the poor-risk group, analysed by intention to treat and a secondary analysis of patients as treated. The trial is registered with EudraCT (2004-001647-30) and ClinicalTrials.gov, number NCT00287105. FINDINGS: Between Jan 1, 2004, and Dec 31, 2009, we screened 229 patients and enrolled 178: 108 were good risk and 70 poor risk. 46 good-risk patients were assigned to receive imatinib and 44 to receive no imatinib. Median follow-up was 3·1 years (IQR 2·0-4·6). 4-year disease-free survival was 72·9% (95% CI 56·1-84·1) in the good-risk, imatinib group versus 61·7% (45·0-74·7) in the good-risk, no imatinib group (p=0·24). The hazard ratio (HR) for failure, adjusted for minimal residual disease, was 0·63 (0·28-1·41; p=0·26). The as-treated analysis showed 4-year disease-free survival was 75·2% (61·0-84·9) for good-risk patients receiving imatinib and 55·9% (36·1-71·7) for those who did not receive imatinib (p=0·06). 4-year event-free survival for poor-risk patients was 53·5% (40·4-65·0). Serious adverse events were much the same in the good-risk groups, with infections caused by myelosuppression the most common. 16 patients in the good-risk imatinib group versus ten in the good-risk, no imatinib group (p=0·64), and 24 in the poor-risk group, had a serious adverse event. INTERPRETATION: Our results suggests that imatinib in conjunction with intensive chemotherapy is well tolerated and might be beneficial for treatment of children with Philadelphia-chromosome-positive ALL. FUNDING: Projet Hospitalier de Recherche Clinique-Cancer (France), Fondazione Tettamanti-De Marchi and Associazione Italiana per la Ricerca sul Cancro (Italy), Novartis Germany, Cancer Research UK, Leukaemia Lymphoma Research, and Central Manchester University Hospitals Foundation Trust.
-------------------------------------

10007405_234 - 0.769791623281 - science
[pulse, precursor, frequency, emission, giant, range, radio, pulsar]

Crab giant pulses at low frequencies
We report observations of the Crab pulsar at frequencies in the range of 110-180 MHz. The combination of coherent dedispersion and the narrow synthesised beam of the Westerbork Synthesis Radio Telescope resulted in a sensitive observation. Our improved sensitivity and resolution allow us to confirm the presence of a precursor to the interpulse at these frequencies. We also detected more than 1000 giant pulses and find that the interpulse precursor component shows no giant pulse emission. Therefore, we attribute it to a similar emission source as the precursor to the mainpulse. Together these precursors might be the normal emission seen from the majority of radio pulsars. From the dispersion-free giant pulses, we find that the emission rate is \ {}10-20 ?? 10-3 s-1 and the scatter timescale in the range of \ {}1.5-5.6 ms. We further find that the radio flux of the pulsar is 6-11 Jy in this frequency range.
-------------------------------------

10008936_234 - 0.775954292306 - science
[fibre, nerve, damage, neuropathy, corneal, technique, biopsy, small, repair, microscopy]

Corneal confocal microscopy: a novel non-invasive technique to quantify small fibre pathology in peripheral neuropathies.
The accurate quantification of peripheral neuropathy is important to define at risk patients, anticipate deterioration, and assess new therapies. Conventional methods assess neurological deficits and electrophysiology and quantitative sensory testing quantifies functional alterations to detect neuropathy. However, the earliest damage appears to be to the small fibres and yet these tests primarily assess large fibre dysfunction and have a limited ability to demonstrate regeneration and repair. The only techniques which allow a direct examination of unmyelinated nerve fibre damage and repair are sural nerve biopsy with electron microscopy and skin-punch biopsy. However, both are invasive procedures and require lengthy laboratory procedures and considerable expertise. Corneal Confocal microscopy is a non-invasive clinical technique which provides in-vivo imaging of corneal nerve fibres. We have demonstrated early nerve damage, which precedes loss of intraepidermal nerve fibres in skin biopsies together with stratification of neuropathic severity and repair following pancreas transplantation in diabetic patients. We have also demonstrated nerve damage in idiopathic small fibre neuropathy and Fabry's disease.
-------------------------------------

10017113_234 - 0.74357544535 - science
[control, autofluorescence, iqr, patient, dcssc, morphea, ssc, lcssc, measurement, skin]

Noninvasive measurement of skin autofluorescence is increased in patients with systemic sclerosis: an indicator of increased advanced glycation endproducts?
OBJECTIVE: Skin autofluorescence noninvasively assesses expression of advanced glycation endproducts and therefore potentially the presence of oxidative stress that is implicated in the pathogenesis of systemic sclerosis (SSc). We investigated whether autofluorescence was increased in patients with SSc, primary Raynaud's phenomenon (RP), and morphea as compared to healthy controls. METHODS: Measurements of autofluorescence were made at 5 upper limb sites in 16 healthy controls, 16 patients with diffuse cutaneous SSc (dcSSc), 15 with limited cutaneous SSc (lcSSc), 15 with primary RP, and 13 with morphea. For patients with morphea, additional measurements were made at the affected and an adjacent unaffected site. RESULTS: Autofluorescence was significantly increased in patients with dcSSc but not lcSSc as compared to controls at the proximal phalanx dcSSc median 0.15, interquartile range (IQR) 0.10-0.24, vs control 0.10, IQR 0.07-0.13; p = 0.014, dorsum of the hand (dcSSc 0.17, IQR 0.11-0.36, vs control 0.12, IQR 0.09-0.17; p = 0.031), the wrist (dcSSc 0.22, IQR 0.13-0.33, vs control 0.13, IQR 0.09-0.18; p = 0.005), and forearm (dcSSc 0.19, IQR 0.12-0.47, vs control 0.14, IQR 0.10-0.16; p = 0.022). There was a trend for autofluorescence to be increased in patients with lcSSc and at morphea sites, compared to noninvolved skin. CONCLUSION: Autofluorescence is increased in patients with dcSSc compared to primary RP and to healthy controls. This suggests increased oxidative stress and the potential for autofluorescence as a biomarker.
-------------------------------------

10005551_234 - 0.86816119356 - medicine
[disease, crohn, patient]

Toxic dilatation of colon in Crohn's disease.
12 cases of toxic dilatation of the colon in Crohn's disease were reviewed. In 11 this complication seemed to be the first manifestation of the disease and a considerable diagnostic delay may partly account for the strikingly high mortality (50%). On admission 83% had clinical features suggestive of Crohn's disease and 58% had experienced symptoms suggestive of preceding gastrointestinal disease. An iatrogenic precipitating factor was identifiable in all but the 1 patient with established disease and in 83% of cases antidiarrhoeals had been prescribed. Preoperative perforation occurred in 4 patients, 3 of whom had had a barium-enema examination, and thromboembolism was a common postoperative complication (50%). Fever, tachycardia, low serum calcium, and low serum albumin in a patient with diarrhoea, abdominal pain, and distension should alert the physician to the possibility of Crohn's disease even in the absence of preexisting symptoms. Sigmoidoscopy should be an early investigation with particular attention being paid to perianal disease.
-------------------------------------

10005276_234 - 0.869374705094 - medicine
[scar, assessment, patient, questionnaire, subscale, group, symptom, measure]

The Patient Scar Assessment Questionnaire: a reliable and valid patient-reported outcomes measure for linear scars.
BACKGROUND: There is a lack of rigorously validated patient-based outcomes measures of scarring. The aim of this study was to construct such a scale and demonstrate reliability and validity by applying the scale in a wide range of scarring samples. METHODS: The Patient Scar Assessment Questionnaire with five subscales (i.e., Appearance, Symptoms, Consciousness, Satisfaction with Appearance, and Satisfaction with Symptoms) was constructed using multiple categorical response items. The Patient Scar Assessment Questionnaire was applied to various surgical samples (total scar assessments n = 667) at months 3, 6, and 12 after surgery (and preoperatively in the scar revision group) and tested for internal consistency, test-retest reliability, convergent validity, known group differences, and sensitivity, against widely accepted criteria from psychometric measurement science. RESULTS: Subscales showed high internal consistency (Cronbach alpha, 0.73 to 0.93), except the Symptoms subscale. Test-retest reliability was high across all subscales (intraclass correlation coefficient, 0.74 to 0.87) across all groups except the scar revision group. Change in Patient Scar Assessment Questionnaire scores was significant between months 3 and 6 postoperatively (p < 0.001) and subscales demonstrated known group differences (p < 0.001). Convergent validity was demonstrated by significant moderate correlations with various measures of similar constructs (r = 0.26 to 0.61, p < 0.001). CONCLUSIONS: The Patient Scar Assessment Questionnaire is a reliable and valid measure of the patient's perception of scarring, although the Symptoms subscale requires further refinement. Subscales can be used independently of each other to allow assessment of scar change in specific domains.
-------------------------------------

10003847_234 - 0.805708117298 - science
[creole, analytic, synthetic, variety, english, frequency, index, language, grammatical, corpus]

Measuring analyticity and syntheticity in creoles
Creoles (here including expanded pidgins) are commonly viewed as being more analytic than their lexifiers and other languages in terms of grammatical marking. The purpose of the study reported in this article was to examine the validity of this view by measuring the frequency of analytic (and synthetic) markers in corpora of two different English-lexified creoles – Tok Pisin and Hawai‘i Creole – and comparing the quantitative results with those for other language varieties. 

To measure token frequency, 1000 randomly selected words in each creole corpus were tagged with regard to word class, and categorized as being analytic, synthetic, both analytic and synthetic, or purely lexical. On this basis, an Analyticity Index and a Syntheticity Index were calculated. These were first compared to indices for other languages and then to L1 varieties of English (e.g. standard British and American English and British dialects) and L2 varieties (e.g. Singapore English and Hong Kong English). Type frequency was determined by the size of the inventories of analytic and synthetic markers used in the corpora, and similar comparisons were made. 

The results show that in terms of both token and type frequency of grammatical markers, the creoles are not more analytic than the other varieties. However, they are significantly less synthetic, resulting in much higher ratios of analytic to synthetic marking. An explanation for this finding relates to the particular strategy for grammatical expansion used by individuals when the creoles were developing.
-------------------------------------

10009345_234 - 0.861286555293 - science
[cell, autophagy, tumor, senescent, inhibitor, senescence, induction, cdk, fibroblast, growth]

CDK inhibitors (p16/p19/p21) induce senescence and autophagy in cancer-associated fibroblasts, "fueling" tumor growth via paracrine interactions, without an increase in neo-angiogenesis.
Here, we investigated the compartment-specific role of cell cycle arrest and senescence in breast cancer tumor growth. For this purpose, we generated a number of hTERT-immortalized senescent fibroblast cell lines overexpressing CDK inhibitors, such as p16(INK4A), p19(ARF) or p21(WAF1/CIP1). Interestingly, all these senescent fibroblast cell lines showed evidence of increased susceptibility toward the induction of autophagy (either at baseline or after starvation), as well as significant mitochondrial dysfunction. Most importantly, these senescent fibroblasts also dramatically promoted tumor growth (up to ~2-fold), without any comparable increases in tumor angiogenesis. Conversely, we generated human breast cancer cells (MDA-MB-231 cells) overexpressing CDK inhibitors, namely p16(INK4A) or p21(WAF1/CIP1). Senescent MDA-MB-231 cells also showed increased expression of markers of cell cycle arrest and autophagy, including β-galactosidase, as predicted. Senescent MDA-MB-231 cells had retarded tumor growth, with up to a near 2-fold reduction in tumor volume. Thus, the effects of CDK inhibitors are compartment-specific and are related to their metabolic effects, which results in the induction of autophagy and mitochondrial dysfunction. Finally, induction of cell cycle arrest with specific inhibitors (PD0332991) or cellular stressors hydrogen peroxide (H(2)O(2)) or starvation indicated that the onset of autophagy and senescence are inextricably linked biological processes. The compartment-specific induction of senescence (and hence autophagy) may be a new therapeutic target that could be exploited for the successful treatment of human breast cancer patients.
-------------------------------------

10009167_234 - 0.746241303201 - science
[theory, polarisability, compton, baldin, fit, datum, proton, stat, alpha, dipole]

Using Effective Field Theory to analyse low-energy Compton scattering data from protons and light nuclei
Compton scattering provides important insight into the structure of the nucleon. For photons up to about 300 MeV, it is parameterised by six dynamical dipole polarisabilities which characterise the response of the nucleon to a monochromatic photon of fixed frequency and multipolarity. Their zero-energy limit yields the well-known static electric and magnetic dipole polarisabilities \alpha and \beta, and the four dipole spin polarisabilities. Chiral Effective Field Theory (ChiEFT) describes nucleon, deuteron and 3-He Compton scattering, using consistent nuclear currents, rescattering and wave functions. It can thus also be used to extract useful information on the neutron amplitude from Compton scattering on light nuclei. We summarise past work in ChiEFT on all of these reactions and compare with other theoretical approaches. We also discuss all proton experiments up to about 400 MeV, as well as the three modern elastic deuteron data sets, paying particular attention to precision and accuracy of each set. Constraining the Delta(1232) parameters from the resonance region, we then perform new fits to the proton data up to omega(lab)=170 MeV, and a new fit to the deuteron data. After checking in each case that a two-parameter fit is compatible with the respective Baldin sum rules, we obtain, using the sum-rule constraints in a one-parameter fit, alpha=10.7+/-0.3(stat)+/-0.2(Baldin)+/-0.8(theory), beta=3.1-/+0.3(stat)+/-0.2(Baldin)+/-0.8(theory), for the proton polarisabilities, and alpha =10.9+/- 0.9(stat)+/-0.2(Baldin)+/-0.8(theory), beta =3.6-/+ 0.9(stat)+/-0.2(Baldin)+/-0.8(theory), for the isoscalar polarisabilities, each in units of 10^(-4) fm^3. We discuss plans for polarised Compton scattering, their promise as tools to access spin polarisabilities, and other future avenues for theoretical and experimental investigation.
-------------------------------------

10010325_234 - 0.719851612198 - science
[disease, protein, model]

Neurodegenerative diseases: Lessons from genome-wide screens in small model organisms
Various age-related neurodegenerative diseases, including Parkinson's disease, polyglutamine expansion diseases and Alzheimer's disease, are associated with the accumulation of misfolded proteins in aggregates in the brain. How and why these proteins form aggregates and cause disease is still poorly understood. Small model organisms-the baker's yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae, the nematode worm Caenorhabditis elegans and the fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster -have been used to model these diseases and high-throughput genetic screens using these models have led to the identification of a large number of genes that modify aggregation and toxicity of the disease proteins. In this review, we revisit these models and provide a comprehensive comparison of the genetic screens performed so far. Our integrative analysis highlights alterations of a wide variety of basic cellular processes. Not all disease proteins are influenced by alterations in the same cellular processes and despite the unifying theme of protein misfolding and aggregation, the pathology of each of the age-related misfolding disorders can be induced or influenced by a disease-protein-specific subset of molecular processes. ?? 2009 EMBO Molecular Medicine.
-------------------------------------

10007779_234 - 0.914608427482 - science
[tumour, microvascular, brain, angiogenesis]

Imaging biomarkers of angiogenesis and the microvascular environment in cerebral tumours.
Conventional contrast-enhanced CT and MRI are now in routine clinical use for the diagnosis, treatment and monitoring of diseases in the brain. The presence of contrast enhancement is a proxy for the pathological changes that occur in the normally highly regulated brain vasculature and blood-brain barrier. With recognition of the limitations of these techniques, and a greater appreciation for the nuanced mechanisms of microvascular change in a variety of pathological processes, novel techniques are under investigation for their utility in further interrogating the microvasculature of the brain. This is particularly important in tumours, where the reliance on angiogenesis (new vessel formation) is crucial for tumour growth, and the resulting microvascular configuration and derangement has profound implications for diagnosis, treatment and monitoring. In addition, novel therapeutic approaches that seek to directly modify the microvasculature require more sensitive and specific biological markers of baseline tumour behaviour and response. The currently used imaging biomarkers of angiogenesis and brain tumour microvascular environment are reviewed.
-------------------------------------

10011854_234 - 0.88459341648 - science
[times, distilled, ultrasonically, epithelial, water, lung, permeability, cited, nebulized, effect]

THE EFFECT OF ULTRASONICALLY NEBULIZED DISTILLED WATER ON LUNG EPITHELIAL PERMEABILITY
Times Cited: 1
-------------------------------------

10009744_234 - 0.872522522475 - science
[specimen, fungal, candida, detection, tissue, pcr]

Panfungal PCR and multiplex liquid hybridization for detection of fungi in tissue specimens.
A procedure based on panfungal PCR and multiplex liquid hybridization was developed for the detection of fungi in tissue specimens. The PCR amplified the fungal internal transcribed spacer (ITS) region (ITS1-5.8S rRNA-ITS2). After capture with specific probes, eight common fungal pathogens (Aspergillus flavus, Aspergillus fumigatus, Candida albicans, Candida krusei, Candida glabrata, Candida parapsilosis, Candida tropicalis, and Cryptococcus neoformans) were identified according to the size of the amplification product on an automated sequencer. The nonhybridized products were identified by sequencing. The performance of the procedure was examined with 12 deep-tissue specimens and 8 polypous tissue biopsies from the paranasal sinuses. A detection level of 0.1 to 1 pg of purified DNA (2 to 20 CFU) was achieved. Of the 20 specimens, PCR was positive for 19 (95%), of which 10 (53%) were hybridization positive. In comparison, 12 (60%) of the specimens were positive by direct microscopy, but only 7 (35%) of the specimens showed fungal growth. Sequencing of the nonhybridized amplification products identified an infecting agent in six specimens, and three specimens yielded only sequences of unknown fungal origin. The procedure provides a rapid (within 2 days) detection of common fungal pathogens in tissue specimens, and it is highly versatile for the identification of other fungal pathogens.
-------------------------------------

10018376_234 - 0.899635628852 - science
[lta, pgp, neutrophil, inflammation]

A critical role for LTA4H in limiting chronic pulmonary neutrophilic inflammation.
Leukotriene A(4) hydrolase (LTA(4)H) is a proinflammatory enzyme that generates the inflammatory mediator leukotriene B(4) (LTB(4)). LTA(4)H also possesses aminopeptidase activity with unknown substrate and physiological importance; we identified the neutrophil chemoattractant proline-glycine-proline (PGP) as this physiological substrate. PGP is a biomarker for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and is implicated in neutrophil persistence in the lung. In acute neutrophil-driven inflammation, PGP was degraded by LTA(4)H, which facilitated the resolution of inflammation. In contrast, cigarette smoke, a major risk factor for the development of COPD, selectively inhibited LTA(4)H aminopeptidase activity, which led to the accumulation of PGP and neutrophils. These studies imply that therapeutic strategies inhibiting LTA(4)H to prevent LTB(4) generation may not reduce neutrophil recruitment because of elevated levels of PGP.
-------------------------------------

10018155_234 - 0.875427620765 - science
[electron, magnetite, x-ray, fe, amorphous, synchrotron, powder, sulfurreducen, iii, mineral]

Time-resolved synchrotron X-ray powder diffraction study of biogenic nanomagnetite
The bacterium Geobacter sulfurreducens can produce nanoparticulate magnetite (Fe3O4) by the reduction of amorphous Fe(III) oxyhydroxide coupled to the oxidation of organic matter in the anoxic subsurface as an alternative to oxygen respiration. G. sulfurreducens can transfer electrons to solid Fe(III)-bearing minerals through either direct contact between the cell and the mineral surface or by using an electron shuttling compound. High-resolution synchrotron X-ray powder diffraction has been used to study samples taken at different stages of this reaction. This shows that an initial amorphous phase first transforms to goethite (FeO(OH)), before undergoing a further transformation to magnetite. Magnetite is formed faster in the presence of the electron shuttling compound disodium anthraquinone 2,6 disulphonate.
-------------------------------------

10003345_234 - 0.799583424635 - science
[skeletal, pattern, class, polyarticular, corticosteroid, systemic, use, temporomandibular, oligoarticular, sign]

Juvenile idiopathic arthritis (JIA): a screening study to measure class II skeletal pattern, TMJ PDS and use of systemic corticosteroids.
OBJECTIVE: To screen patients with oligoarticular and polyarticular forms of Juvenile Idiopathic Arthritis (JIA) to determine (i) the severity of their class II skeletal pattern; (ii) temporomandibular joint signs and symptoms and (iii) use of systemic corticosteroids. DESIGN: Cross-sectional screening. SUBJECTS AND SETTING: Sixty-eight children with JIA aged between 9 and 16 years old who were screened at four regional treatment centres in the UK. METHOD: Patients were screened clinically and radiographically for the presence of class II skeletal pattern and temporomandibular (TMJ) pain dysfunction syndrome. In addition, the JIA sub-type and history of disease activity and medication were recorded. MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Class II skeletal pattern, TMJ signs and symptoms, use of systemic corticosteroids. RESULTS: The mean ANB values were 4.2 degrees (SD = 2.9 degrees) in the oligoarticular group and 5.1 degrees (SD = 3.8 degrees) in the polyarticular group. Just under one-third of children had a moderate or severe class II skeletal pattern and a further quarter of children had a mild class II skeletal pattern. Clinical signs and symptoms of temporomandibular joint pain dysfunction syndrome were low (<20%), except for crepitus and click which affected between 24 and 40% of JIA children. Radiographically, 57% of oligoarticular and 77% of polyarticular cases exhibited condylar erosion. Use of systemic corticosteroids varied between centres, but overall, was prescribed more in polyarticular cases (P = 0.001). CONCLUSIONS: Just under one-third of oligoarticular and polyarticular JIA patients exhibited a moderate or severe class II skeletal pattern. It is, therefore, likely that any future clinical trial to investigate the effect of functional appliance treatment in JIA patients, will need multicentre co-operation to fulfil potential sample size requirements. Clinical signs and symptoms of temporomandibular joint pain dysfunction syndrome were low except for crepitus and click. However, radiographic evidence of condylar erosion was high particularly in the polyarticular group. Use of systemic corticosteroids was prescribed more in polyarticular cases and this is likely to reflect the severity of the disease.
-------------------------------------

10004912_234 - 0.720563375529 - medicine
[patient, tissue, soft, trial, technique, mucosa, flap, implant, dental, flapless]

Interventions for replacing missing teeth: management of soft tissues for dental implants.
BACKGROUND: Dental implants are usually placed by elevating a soft tissue flap, but in some instances, they can also be placed flapless reducing patient discomfort. Several flap designs and suturing techniques have been proposed. Soft tissues are often manipulated and augmented for aesthetic reasons. It is often recommended that implants are surrounded by a sufficient width of attached/keratinised mucosa to improve their long-term prognosis. OBJECTIVES: To evaluate whether (1a) flapless procedures are beneficial for patients, and (1b) which is the ideal flap design; whether (2a) soft tissue correction/augmentation techniques are beneficial for patients, and (2b) which are the best techniques; whether (3a) techniques to increase the peri-implant keratinised mucosa are beneficial for patients, and (3b) which are the best techniques; and (4) which are the best suturing techniques/materials. SEARCH METHODS: The following electronic databases were searched: the Cochrane Oral Health Group Trials Register (to 9 June 2011), the Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials (CENTRAL) (The Cochrane Library 2011, Issue 2), MEDLINE via OVID (1950 to 9 June 2011), EMBASE via OVID (1980 to 9 June 2011). Several dental journals were handsearched. There were no language restrictions. SELECTION CRITERIA: All randomised controlled trials (RCTs) of root-form osseointegrated dental implants, with a follow-up of at least 6 months after function, comparing various techniques to handle soft tissues in relation to dental implants. Outcome measures, according to the different hypotheses, were: prosthetic and implant failures, biological complications, aesthetics evaluated by patients and dentists, postoperative pain, marginal peri-implant bone level changes on periapical radiographs, patient preference, ease of maintenance by patient, soft tissue thickness changes and attached/keratinised mucosa height changes. DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Screening of eligible studies, assessment of the methodological quality of the trials and data extraction were conducted at least in duplicate and independently by two or more review authors. Trial authors were contacted for missing information. Results were expressed using risk ratios for dichotomous outcomes and mean differences for continuous outcomes with 95% confidence intervals. MAIN RESULTS: Seventeen potentially eligible RCTs were identified but only six trials with 138 patients in total could be included. One study was at low risk of bias, two studies were judged to be at unclear risk of bias and three at high risk of bias. Two trials (56 patients) compared flapless placement of dental implants with conventional flap elevation, one trial (10 patients) compared crestal versus vestibular incisions, one trial (20 patients) Erbium:YAG laser versus flap elevation at the second-stage surgery for implant exposure, one split-mouth trial (10 patients) evaluated whether connective tissue graft at implant placement could be effective in augmenting peri-implant tissues, and one trial (40 patients) compared autograft with an animal-derived collagen matrix to increase the height of the keratinised mucosa. On a patient, rather than per implant basis, implants placed with a flapless technique and implant exposures performed with laser induced statistically significantly less postoperative pain than flap elevation. Sites augmented with soft tissues connective grafts showed a better aesthetic and thicker tissues. Both palatal autografts or the use of a porcine-derived collagen matrix are effective in increasing the height of keratinised mucosa at the price of a 0.5 mm recession of peri-implant soft tissues. There were no other statistically significant differences for any of the remaining analyses. AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: There is limited weak evidence suggesting that flapless implant placement is feasible and has been shown to reduce patient postoperative discomfort in adequately selected patients, that augmentation at implant sites with soft tissue grafts is effective in increasing soft tissue thickness improving aesthetics and that one technique to increase the height of keratinised mucosa using autografts or an animal-derived collagen matrix was able to achieve its goal but at the price of a worsened aesthetic outcome (0.5 mm of recession). There is insufficient reliable evidence to provide recommendations on which is the ideal flap design, the best soft tissue augmentation technique, whether techniques to increase the width of keratinised/attached mucosa are beneficial to patients or not, and which are the best incision/suture techniques/materials. Properly designed and conducted RCTs, with at least 6 months of follow-up, are needed to provide reliable answers to these questions.
-------------------------------------

10007063_234 - 0.731353344179 - science
[type, presence, skin, -pv, hpv, transplant, patient, cutaneous, otr, antibody]

Factors associated with the seroprevalence of 26 cutaneous and two genital human papillomavirus types in organ transplant patients.
Viral skin infections are commonly present in organ transplant recipients (OTR). In this study, we aimed to identify factors associated with human papillomavirus (HPV) infections in OTR. Patients with solid-organ transplants were recruited from the outpatient nephrology and dermatology clinics in five European countries. Only patients with no current or past skin cancer were included in this analysis. Serum samples were analysed for antibodies to the L1 proteins of 26 cutaneous and two genital HPV types from five phylogenetic genera (α, β, γ, μ and ν). The most consistent association was found between recreational sun exposure and the seroprevalence of all tested genera, except α. The antibody presence of any β type was higher among people who had been transplanted at least 23 years prior to participation than in those who had been transplanted for less than 7 years. The prevalence of two γ-HPV types (60 and 65) and three β-HPV types (15, 38 and 49) was associated with time since transplantation. The presence of a high number of warts was associated with the presence of any μ-PV or ν-PV types, and having greater than 50 keratotic skin lesions was almost significantly associated with the presence of antibodies to two or more γ-PV. Discrepancies in the results of the present study, as well as in previous reports, may depend on different methodologies and on geographical variations. Our results also indicate that further research with more standardized methods is needed to clarify the role of cutaneous HPV in OTR.
-------------------------------------

10017181_234 - 0.921219606672 - science
[phagocytosis, conidium, neutrophil, crp, fumigatus, metabolically-active, human, aspergillus, c-reactive, protein]

Opsonizing activity of C-reactive protein in phagocytosis of Aspergillus fumigatus conidia by human neutrophils.
In complement-free neutrophil monolayer assays pathological levels of C-reactive protein (CRP) were found to promote greater phagocytosis of metabolically-active conidia of Aspergillus fumigatus than dormant spores. This suggests that metabolically-active conidia bind CRP which facilitates in vitro phagocytosis by human neutrophils.
-------------------------------------

10003284_234 - 0.940655239316 - medicine
[patient, il-12, mycobacterium, infection, il-23r1, receptor, interleukin-12, partial, novel]

Disseminated Mycobacterium genavense infection in a patient with a novel partial interleukin-12/23 receptor β1 deficiency.
A patient presented with late onset disseminated nontuberculous mycobacterium (NTM) infection due to a novel interleukin-12/interleukin-23 receptor β1 (IL-12/IL-23Rβ1) mutation, r.1561C>G, leading to the amino acid substitution R521G. This is the second patient reported with a partial IL-12/IL-23Rβ1 defect.
-------------------------------------

10009825_234 - 0.930067798699 - science
[microscopy, dermatophyte, infection]

Diagnosis and pathogenesis of dermatophyte infections.
Dissemination of dermatophyte fungi depends on direct or indirect contact between infected and uninfected hosts. The first step in the infection process is colonisation of the cornified surface of the stratum corneum. The fungal form which is the contagious and infectious particle is most likely to be the arthrospore or a hyphal fragment adhering to or contained within a corneocyte. It is the distinctive morphological forms of hyphae and arthrospores, and the relatively large size of dermatophytes in keratinous tissue, that provide the basis of a rapid diagnostic method using microscopy. Microscopy may also have to provide the definitive diagnosis of a dermatophyte infection, eg, in onychomycosis, where a significant proportion of the samples which are positive on microscopy fail to grow in culture. The sensitivity of microscopy can be enhanced using KOH that incorporates a variety of dyes, or a fluorescent brightener (eg, Calcofluor white or Blankophor BA). This type of agent can also be used to recognise fungal elements in biopsy sections. However, culture has certain benefits over microscopy; it is a more sensitive technique, since much more material can be examined and a definitive identity of the organism can be obtained.
-------------------------------------

10007590_234 - 0.920311783706 - science
[physiological, oscillation, interaction, study, fluid-structure]

Fluid-Structure Interaction in Internal Physiological Flows
We provide a selective review of recent progress in the analysis of   several physiological and physiologically inspired fluid-structure   interaction problems, our aim being to explain the underlying physical   mechanisms that cause the observed behaviors. Specifically, we discuss   recent studies of self-excited oscillations in collapsible tubes,   focusing primarily on studies of an idealized model system, the   Starling-resistor a device used in most laboratory experiments. We next   review studies of a particular physiological, flow-induced oscillation:   vocal-fold oscillations during phonation. Finally, we discuss the   closure and reopening of pulmonary airways, physiological   fluid-structure interaction problems that also involve the airways'   liquid lining.
-------------------------------------

10018236_234 - 0.789707408646 - science
[mouse, human, review, placental]

Review: Transport across the placenta of mice and women.
Since the advent of technologies to produce genetic knockout and transgenic mice, the number of mouse strains suggested to be useful as models for pregnancy-related complications in the human has risen substantially. Some of these share features in common with fetal growth restriction (FGR) and preeclampsia (PE) and could be useful for investigating aetiologies and for testing potential therapeutics to improve outcome in these diseases. However, since placental pathology is a major underlying factor in both FGR and PE, it is important to understand the similarities and differences in structure and function of the placenta between mice and women. The main aim of this review is to directly compare placental exchange physiology between human and mouse. The review will compare human and mouse in both normal and pathological circumstances, to attempt to answer the question of whether placental studies in the mouse can be translated to the human. The review includes descriptions of placental structure between the species, comparisons of nutrient transport, including amino acids, glucose and calcium, and evidence of how these transport systems are altered in both human FGR and mouse models of this disease. Finally, our review will conclude by examining studies in which mouse models of FGR/PE have been treated with drugs of potential therapeutic value in women and consider whether data obtained in mice can be a prelude for clinical trials in human.
-------------------------------------

10011025_234 - 0.901863593455 - science
[condition, schwertmannite, goethite, alkaline, mechanism, transformation, kinetics, hematite]

The kinetics and mechanisms of schwertmannite transformation to goethite and hematite under alkaline conditions
cited By (since 1996) 14
-------------------------------------

10008609_234 - 0.869896725733 - science
[donor, lymphocyte, sulphate, pbmc, nickel, allergen, concentration, non-sensitized, transformation, test]

Attempts to identify the causative allergen in cases of allergic contact dermatitis using an in vitro lymphocyte transformation test.
The use of an in vitro lymphocyte transformation test for the identification of the causative allergen in cases of human allergic contact dermatitis is described. Peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) were prepared from the venous blood of seven nickel-sensitized (patch test-positive) patients and ten non-sensitized control donors, and induced proliferation was measured by (3)Hthymidine incorporation following culture for 7 days in the presence of various concentrations of nickel sulphate. Nickel sulphate is non-specifically mitogenic for human lymphocytes and although PBMC from all donors exhibited a significant increase in proliferation with nickel sulphate concentrations of 20 mug/ml, those isolated from Ni-sensitive patients responded to lower concentrations of the allergen. Employing a stimulation index of 3 following culture with 5 mug NiSO(4)/ml as an arbitrary indicator of specific proliferative responses to nickel, it was possible, using the lymphocyte transformation test, to separate Ni-sensitive from non-sensitized donors. In a limited series of experiments it was observed that lymphocytes prepared from each of two patients sensitized to neomycin sulphate mounted significant proliferative responses to this allergen in vitro; neomycin sulphate failed to induce similar changes in PBMC from non-sensitized donors. Finally, PBMC from one of two 2,4-dinitrochlorobenzene-sensitized donors were found to respond to autologous cells bearing the relevant dinitrophenol hapten.
-------------------------------------

10007635_234 - 0.700204707141 - science
[acoustic, cell, phase, method, tissue, soft, substrate]

Multi-Layer Phase Analysis: Quantifying the Elastic Properties of Soft Tissues and Live Cells with Ultra-High-Frequency Scanning Acoustic Microscopy
Scanning acoustic microscopy is potentially a powerful tool for characterizing the elastic properties of soft biological tissues and cells. In this paper, we present a method, multi-layer phase analysis (MLPA), which can be used to extract local speed of sound values, for both thin tissue sections mounted on glass slides and cultured cells grown on cell culture plastic, with a resolution close to 1 mu m. The method exploits the phase information that is preserved in the interference between the acoustic wave reflected from the substrate surface and internal reflections from the acoustic lens. In practice, a stack of acoustic images are captured beginning with the acoustic focal point 4 mu m above the substrate surface and moving down in 0.1-mu m increments. Scanning parameters, such as acoustic wave frequency and gate position, were adjusted to obtain optimal phase and lateral resolution. The data were processed offline to extract the phase information with the contribution of any inclination in the substrate removed before the calculation of sound speed. Here, we apply this approach to both skin sections and fibroblast cells, and compare our data with the V(f) (voltage versus frequency) method that has previously been used for characterization of soft tissues and cells. Compared with the V(f) method, the MPLA method not only reduces signal noise but can be implemented without making a priori assumptions with regards to tissue or cell parameters.
-------------------------------------

10011710_234 - 0.789722181392 - science
[cell, epithelial, expression, u937, fut1, macrophage]

Macrophages regulate expression of α1,2-fucosyltransferase genes in human endometrial epithelial cells.
The epithelial cell surface of the endometrium undergoes substantial biochemical changes to allow embryo attachment and implantation in early pregnancy. We hypothesized that tissue macrophages influence these events to promote uterine receptivity. To investigate the role of macrophages in regulating epithelial cell expression of genes linked to glycan-mediated embryo adhesion, Ishikawa, RL95-2 and HEC1A endometrial epithelial cells were cultured alone or with unactivated or lipopolysaccharide-activated monocytic U937 cells, separated using transwell inserts. Expression of mRNAs encoding two α1,2-fucosyltransferases (FUT1, FUT2) was increased in all three epithelial cell lines following co-culture with U937 cells, and was associated with increased fucosylation of cell surface glycoproteins detected using lectins from Ulex europaeus (UEA-1) and Dolichos biflorus (DBA). FUT1 induction by U937 cells also occurred in primary endometrial epithelial cells collected in luteal but not proliferative phase. Activation of the interleukin-6 (IL6)/leukemia inhibitory factor (LIF) cytokine signaling pathway with phosphorylation of STAT3 and elevated SOCS3 mRNA expression was evident in epithelial cells stimulated by U937 co-culture. Several recombinant macrophage-secreted cytokines exerted stimulatory or inhibitory effects on FUT1 and FUT2 mRNA expression, and the macrophage-derived cytokine LIF partially replicated the effects of U937 cells on both FUT1 and FUT2 expression and UEA-1 and DBA lectin reactivity in Ishikawa cells. These results suggest that macrophage-derived factors including LIF might facilitate development of an implantation-receptive endometrium by regulating surface glycan structures in epithelial cells. Abnormal phenotypes or altered abundance of uterine macrophages could contribute to the pathophysiology of primary unexplained infertility in women.
-------------------------------------

10008359_234 - 0.867289218359 - science
[oxygen, tio2, photoelectron, core, level, spectroscopy]

Visibility of TiO2(110)(1x1) bridging oxygen in core level photoelectron spectroscopy
O 1s core level and valence band photoelectron spectroscopy data have been acquired from adsorbate-free TiO2(110)(1 × 1) in ultrahigh vacuum. Careful analysis of the O 1s spectra demonstrates that there is no distinct feature arising from twofold coordinate surface bridging oxygen atoms. This result resolves apparent ongoing confusion in the literature about this issue.
-------------------------------------

10007500_234 - 0.769689545111 - science
[cell, ctm, cancer, tumor, ctc, emt, patient, lung]

Circulating tumor cells as a window on metastasis biology in lung cancer.
Circulating tumor cell (CTC) number in metastatic cancer patients yields prognostic information consistent with enhanced cell migration and invasion via loss of adhesion, a feature of epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT). Tumor cells also invade via collective migration with maintained cell-cell contacts and consistent with this is the circulating tumor microemboli (CTM; contiguous groups of tumor cells) that are observed in metastatic cancer patients. Using a blood filtration approach, we examined markers of EMT (cytokeratins, E-cadherin, vimentin, neural cadherin) and prevalence of apoptosis in CTCs and CTM to explore likely mechanism(s) of invasion in lung cancer patients and address the hypothesis that cells within CTM have a survival advantage. Intra-patient and inter-patient heterogeneity was observed for EMT markers in CTCs and CTM. Vimentin was only expressed in some CTCs, but in the majority of cells within CTM; E-cadherin expression was lost, cytoplasmic or nuclear, and rarely expressed at the surface of the cells within CTM. A subpopulation of CTCs was apoptotic, but apoptosis was absent within CTM. This pilot study suggests that EMT is not prosecuted homogeneously in tumor cells within the circulation of lung cancer patients and that collective migration and enhanced survival of cells within CTM might contribute to lung cancer metastasis. Multiplex analysis and further detailed exploration of metastatic potential and EMT in CTCs/CTM is now warranted in a larger patient cohort.
-------------------------------------

10009172_234 - 0.911249488672 - science
[opticin, collagen, matrix]

Opticin Exerts Its Anti-angiogenic Activity by Regulating Extracellular Matrix Adhesiveness
Opticin is an extracellular matrix glycoprotein that we identified associated with the collagen network of the vitreous humor of the eye. Recently, we discovered that opticin possesses anti-angiogenic activity using a murine oxygen-induced retinopathy model: here, we investigate the underlying mechanism. Using an ex vivo chick chorioallantoic membrane assay, we show that opticin inhibits angiogenesis when stimulated by a range of growth factors. We show that it suppresses capillary morphogenesis, inhibits endothelial invasion, and promotes capillary network regression in three-dimensional matrices of collagen and Matrigel(TM). We then show that opticin binds to collagen and thereby competitively inhibits endothelial cell interactions with collagen via α(1)β(1) and α(2)β(1) integrins, thereby preventing the strong adhesion that is required for proangiogenic signaling via these integrins.
-------------------------------------

10003667_234 - 0.716628530622 - medicine
[district, nurse, stroke, patient, care, community]

Stroke nursing care and management in the community: a survey of district nurses' perceived contribution in one health district in England.
Little appears to have been written about how district nurses perceive their role in relation to the care and management of stroke patients in the community despite the high number of stroke patients on their case loads. A qualitative study using a semi-structured interview was undertaken with a convenience sample of 30 district nurses representing each locality in one health district in England. Findings suggest that district nurses do not have a major role in the rehabilitation of stroke patients in the community and generally become involved in their care once the patient's chronicity has reached the point of inability to meet self-care demand, or the carer is unable to cope.
-------------------------------------

10005296_234 - 0.755802324238 - technology_and_computing
[code, wireless, measurement, material, picture, experiment, result, dvd-rom, networks, rf]

Wireless Sensor Networks in Hostile RF Environments
DVD-ROM containing supplementary materials, including source code, measurement data, processed results and videos and pictures of experiments.
-------------------------------------

10006908_234 - 0.717937258761 - medicine
[therapy, antitumor, ikdc, il-2, combination, cell, im, effect, il-15]

The critical role of IL-15 in the antitumor effects mediated by the combination therapy imatinib and IL-2.
The synergistic antitumor effects of the combination therapy imatinib mesylate (IM) and IL-2 depended upon NK1.1- expressing cells and were associated with the accumulation of CD11c(int)B220(+)NK1.1(+) IFN-producing killer dendritic cells (IKDC) into tumor beds. In this study, we show that the antitumor efficacy of the combination therapy was compromised in IL-15 and IFN-type 1R loss-of-function mice. IL-15Ralpha was required for the proliferation of IKDC during IM plus IL-2 therapy. Trans-presentation of IL-15/IL-15Ralpha activated IKDC to express CCR2 and to respond to type 1 IFN by producing CCL2. Moreover, the antitumor effects of the combination therapy correlated with a CCL2-dependent recruitment of IKDC, but not B220(-) NK cells, into tumor beds. Altogether, the IL-15-driven peripheral expansion and the CCL-2-dependent intratumoral chemoattraction of IKDC are two critical parameters dictating the antitumor efficacy of IM plus IL-2 in mice.
-------------------------------------

10003624_234 - 0.78119433789 - science
[cancer, dna, cell, methylation, change, hypomethylation, stem]

The dynamics and prognostic potential of DNA methylation changes at stem cell gene loci in women's cancer.
Aberrant DNA methylation is an important cancer hallmark, yet the dynamics of DNA methylation changes in human carcinogenesis remain largely unexplored. Moreover, the role of DNA methylation for prediction of clinical outcome is still uncertain and confined to specific cancers. Here we perform the most comprehensive study of DNA methylation changes throughout human carcinogenesis, analysing 27,578 CpGs in each of 1,475 samples, ranging from normal cells in advance of non-invasive neoplastic transformation to non-invasive and invasive cancers and metastatic tissue. We demonstrate that hypermethylation at stem cell PolyComb Group Target genes (PCGTs) occurs in cytologically normal cells three years in advance of the first morphological neoplastic changes, while hypomethylation occurs preferentially at CpGs which are heavily Methylated in Embryonic Stem Cells (MESCs) and increases significantly with cancer invasion in both the epithelial and stromal tumour compartments. In contrast to PCGT hypermethylation, MESC hypomethylation progresses significantly from primary to metastatic cancer and defines a poor prognostic signature in four different gynaecological cancers. Finally, we associate expression of TET enzymes, which are involved in active DNA demethylation, to MESC hypomethylation in cancer. These findings have major implications for cancer and embryonic stem cell biology and establish the importance of systemic DNA hypomethylation for predicting prognosis in a wide range of different cancers.
-------------------------------------

10004092_234 - 0.839738550096 - science
[fungal, nitrogen, production, pre-treatment, state, liquid, meal, rapeseed, oil, novel]

Enhancing the value of nitrogen from rapeseed meal for microbial oil production
Rapeseed meal, a major byproduct of biodiesel production, has been used as a low-cost raw material for the production of a generic microbial feedstock through a consolidated bioconversion process. Various strategies were tested for the production of a novel fermentation medium, rich in free amino nitrogen (FAN): commercial enzymes (CEs) (2.7 mg g(-1) dry meal), liquid state fungal pre-treatment (LSF) using Aspergillus oryzae (4.6 mg g(-1)), liquid state fungal pre-treatment followed by fungal autolysis (LSFA) (9.13 mg g(-1)), liquid state pre-treatment using fungal enzymatic broth (EB) (2.1 mg g(-1)), but the best strategy was a solid state fungal pre-treatment followed by fungal autolysis (34.5 mg g(-1)). The bioavailability of the nitrogen sources in the novel medium was confirmed in fed-batch bioreactor studies, in which 82.3 g dry cell L-1 of the oleaginous yeast Rhodosporidium toruloides Y4 was obtained with a lipid content of 48\%. The dry cell weight obtained was higher than that obtained using conventional yeast extract, due to a higher total nitrogen content in the novel biomedium. The fatty acids obtained from the microbial oil were similar to those derived from rapeseed oil. (C) 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
-------------------------------------

10009845_234 - 0.90274579477 - science
[neutrophil, binding, acapsulate, cryptococcus]

Differential binding of acapsulate and encapsulated strains of Cryptococcus neoformans to human neutrophils.
Investigations into mechanisms of binding of encapsulated and acapsulate strains of Cryptococcus neoformans by human neutrophils were performed, using a monolayer assay. The two strains bound to neutrophils by different mechanisms although both had an absolute requirement for opsonization with complement components in normal human serum for binding to occur. Neutrophil binding of encapsulated yeasts required conformational changes in actin yet did not appear to lead to phagocytosis of the organism. A maximum of 12 acapsulate cells bound per neutrophil compared with only four encapsulated yeasts. Cytochalasin D treatment reduced the maximum numbers able to bind per neutrophil by 50%. The encapsulated cryptococci appeared to compete with each other for binding to neutrophils whereas the acapsulate yeast cells bound to neutrophils in an approximately Poisson distribution, suggesting independent binding. Binding of acapsulate cryptococci did not require actin filaments and appeared to trigger phagocytosis. Thus, the capsule of C. neoformans appeared to inhibit binding and internalization by neutrophils.
-------------------------------------

10003865_234 - 0.932152132333 - science
[humic, ternary, behaviour, system, partition]

Actinide Partition In Humic Colloidal Ternary Systems
AbstractThe University of Manchester by Rajiv Robert Kay for the Degree of Doctor of Philosophy, entitledActinide Partition in Humic Colloidal Ternary systemsDate of Submission: 20/09/2012The partition of radionuclides between solid and solution phase has been studied in humic/quartz sand ternary systems. Data have been recorded under ambient (air) and inert (O2 and CO2 free) atmospheres. For Eu(III) and Th(IV), the systems show simple ternary behaviour, with sorption decreasing (and mobility increasing) in the presence of humic, whilst for U(VI), the behaviour is more complex, with the humic enhancing sorption and reducing mobility. There is also evidence that the sorbed humic has an enhanced affinity for the uranyl, which is probably due to fractionation of the humic. Further, the behaviour of plutonium has also been studied in these systems. Pu(IV) showed the simple ternary characteristics, which had been observed for Eu(III) and Th(IV). Pu(V) and Pu(VI) systems exhibited more complex behaviour, with low concentrations of humic actually enhancing sorption, probably due to ternary complex formation. A simple mathematical model has been developed to predict the behaviour of both metal ion and humic acid. The model performs well in predicting the partition of the humic and that of the metal ions in the systems that show simpler ternary behaviour.
-------------------------------------

10005546_234 - 0.93738143792 - medicine
[scg, relapse, effect, patient]

A double-blind controlled trial of the effect of sodium cromoglycate in preventing relapse in ulcerative colitis.
A double-blind controlled trial of the effect of sodium cromoglycate (SCG) in preventing relapse in ulcerative colitis has been completed in 100 subjects. In patients already taking sulphasalazine, SCG did not prove to be of any additional benefit. However, in patients not on any other maintenance therapy, the relapse rate was 40% for SCG as compared with 75% for placebo. A large study of the effect of SCG in patients intolerant of sulphasalazine is indicated.
-------------------------------------

10005589_234 - 0.848133433913 - medicine
[nicardipine, bowel, syndrome, motility, irritable, colonic]

Reduction of colonic motility by intravenous nicardipine in irritable bowel syndrome.
The effect of nicardipine, a new dihydropyridine calcium antagonist, on postprandial colonic motility was assessed in 10 patients with irritable bowel syndrome. Each patient was studied twice receiving intravenously either N saline or nicardipine after a 1000 calorie meal. In the control study there was a significant (p less than 0.01) postprandial increase in the contractile activity of the colon, reaching a peak at approximately 20 minutes. Intravenous nicardipine completely abolished the colonic response, with a significant reduction in the number (p less than 0.005) and amplitude (p less than 0.005) of contractions and of the motility index (p less than 0.025). These results support the need for further studies to evaluate the therapeutic role of nicardipine in the irritable bowel syndrome.
-------------------------------------

10011669_234 - 0.729859612705 - science
[particle, rotorcraft, engine, intake]

Operational Performance Parameters of Engine Barrier Filtration Systems for Rotorcraft
This contribution addresses the subject of engine intake filtration systems for rotorcraft. The reader is introduced to their purpose, which is to eliminate the risk of particle ingestion by the engine, a situation which can cause irrevocable damage to key components. The risk is significantly elevated during a condition known as brownout, in which the rotor wake of a helicopter in ground effect interacts with loose sediment, causing the generation of a dust cloud. In such a condition, IBF successfully removes particles from the engine-bound air at the expense of a pressure drop which grows temporally. This decreases the overall intake efficiency, but at varying degrees dependent on certain factors. An increase in deterioration rate is caused by but not limited to: an increase in incident velocity; and a decrease of mean particle size. However the rate may be slowed by operating the filter at a tangential angle to the flow. The present work uses CFD to carry out a parametric study into the factors affecting particle deposition and uses the results to form a semi-analytical model of pressure drop and ultimately predict the transient intake efficiency for IBF-fitted rotorcraft.
-------------------------------------

10018340_234 - 0.868988140119 - science
[cell, thymic, thymocyte]

Properties of human thymic B cells.
B cells, distinct from those seen in myasthenia gravis, are present in normal human thymic medulla, concentrated around the Hassall's corpuscles. We have shown that they constitute 33 +/- 4.8% of the total cells in the thymic medulla. In tissue sections they were often seen to have rosettes of thymocytes around them, a relationship which was maintained when the cells were isolated from the thymus. Thymic B cells expressed cytoplasmic immunoglobulins IgD, IgM and IgG but only rarely IgA. Unlike murine thymic B cells, human thymic B cells were CD5-. Freshly isolated thymic B cells were activated cells, but they rapidly became quiescent and died in culture over a 10-day period unless stimulated with mitogens. Thymic B cells responded to polyclonal B-cell activators SAC and TPA and when stimulated, maintained their relationship with thymocytes. Electron microscopic studies showed that two morphologically different thymocyte populations associated with the B cells. The plasma membranes of larger thymocytes were juxtaposed to the B-cell membrane, but smaller thymocytes with darker cytoplasm were associated with the B cells via cytoplasmic strands. Studies in mice have suggested that B cells are involved in thymic negative selection. The close association between activated B cells and thymocytes observed in this study supports this hypothesis.
-------------------------------------

10009751_234 - 0.947508390419 - medicine
[diagnosis, chronic, patient, treatment, high]

Invasive aspergillosis.
Acute invasive aspergillosis (IA) is a devastating disease. Early diagnosis allowing an early treatment may improve the prognosis. However, this goal remains difficult to achieve. When diagnosis is confirmed it is often already too late. Galactomannan antigen detection and DNA detection are under clinical evaluation to improve early diagnosis and management of treatment. Despite antifungal treatment mortality rate is still high. Clinical resistance is more often due to the intensity of immunodepression than to high minimum inhibitory concentrations to antifungal agents; however, resistance to itraconazole may occur in rare instances. Beside acute IA, a chronic form of this infection may be seen as chronic necrotizing pulmonary aspergillosis or chronic invasive sinusitis. Other sites of infection have been described. The patients are immunocompetent or present minor alteration of their immunity or of anatomic structure of the infected site. Among patients with solid organ transplantation, lung and liver transplant patients are at the highest risk of developing IA. A high degree of awareness and efforts for an early diagnosis may participate to improve the poor prognosis.
-------------------------------------

10008184_234 - 0.906991719791 - science
[response, lymphocyte, skin, potency, sensitising, sensitisation, allergen, contact]

Allergic contact dermatitis: a commentary on the relationship between T lymphocytes and skin sensitising potency.
T lymphocytes mediate skin sensitisation and allergic contact dermatitis. Not unexpectedly, therefore, there is considerable interest in the use of T lymphocyte-based assays as alternative strategies for the identification of skin sensitising chemicals. However, in addition to accurate identification of hazards the development of effective risk assessments requires that information is available about the relative skin sensitising potency of contact allergens. The purpose of this article is to consider the relationships that exist between the characteristics of T lymphocyte responses to contact allergens and the effectiveness/potency of sensitisation. We propose that there are 3 aspects of T lymphocyte responses that have the potential to impact on the potency of sensitisation. These are: (a) the magnitude of response, and in particular the vigour and duration of proliferation and the clonal expansion of allergen-reactive T lymphocytes, (b) the quality of response, including the balance achieved between effector and regulatory cells, and (c) the breadth of response and the clonal diversity of T lymphocyte responses. A case is made that there may be opportunities to exploit an understanding of T lymphocyte responses to contact allergens to develop novel paradigms for predicting skin sensitising potency and new approaches to risk assessment.
-------------------------------------

10018162_234 - 0.93747776192 - science
[magnetic, nanoparticle, x-ray, magnetite]

Remediation of Cr(VI) by biogenic magnetic nanoparticles: An x-ray magnetic circular dichroism study
Biologically synthesized magnetite (Fe3O4) nanoparticles are studied using x-ray absorption and x-ray magnetic circular dichroism following exposure to hexavalent Cr solution. By examining their magnetic state, Cr cations are shown to exist in trivalent form on octahedral sites within the magnetite spinel surface. The possibility of reducing toxic Cr(VI) into a stable, nontoxic form, such as a Cr3+-spinel layer, makes biogenic magnetite nanoparticles an attractive candidate for Cr remediation. (C) 2009 American Institute of Physics. {}doi: 10.1063/1.3249578
-------------------------------------

10008938_234 - 0.927902312745 - science
[polypeptide, collagen-like, pvtd, collagen, strain, fusion, protein, domain]

Collagen
The present invention relates to a trimeric fusion protein comprising three polypeptide chains, wherein each polypeptide chain comprises a eukaryotic collagen or collagen-like domain and a prokaryotic or viral trimerisation domain (PVTD). Also provided is a fusion polypeptide comprising a eukaryotic collagen or collagen-like domain and a PVTD.  A suitable PVTD of a fusion polypeptide or protein of the invention is preferably derived from a collagen-like protein sequence found in the genome of the E. coli strain O157:H7 and other E. coli strains, and in bacteriophages or prophages infecting these strains or embedded in their genomes. A PVTD mediates trimerisation of collagen or collagen-like polypeptides.
-------------------------------------

10003291_234 - 0.839305297594 - science
[human, trh, melanocyte, hf, pigmentation, transcription, hair, pituitary, hormone]

Thyrotropin-releasing hormone selectively stimulates human hair follicle pigmentation.
In amphibians, thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH) stimulates skin melanophores by inducing secretion of α-melanocyte-stimulating hormone in the pituitary gland. However, it is unknown whether this tripeptide neurohormone exerts any direct effects on pigment cells, namely, on human melanocytes, under physiological conditions. Therefore, we have investigated whether TRH stimulates pigment production in organ-cultured human hair follicles (HFs), the epithelium of which expresses both TRH and its receptor, and/or in full-thickness human skin in situ. TRH stimulated melanin synthesis, tyrosinase transcription and activity, melanosome formation, melanocyte dendricity, gp100 immunoreactivity, and microphthalmia-associated transcription factor expression in human HFs in a pituitary gland-independent manner. TRH also stimulated proliferation, gp100 expression, tyrosinase activity, and dendricity of isolated human HF melanocytes. However, intraepidermal melanogenesis was unaffected. As TRH upregulated the intrafollicular production of "pituitary" neurohormones (proopiomelanocortin transcription and ACTH immunoreactivity) and as agouti-signaling protein counteracted TRH-induced HF pigmentation, these pigmentary TRH effects may be mediated in part by locally generated melanocortins and/or by MC-1 signaling. Our study introduces TRH as a novel, potent, selective, and evolutionarily highly conserved neuroendocrine factor controlling human pigmentation in situ. This physiologically relevant and melanocyte sub-population-specific neuroendocrine control of human pigmentation deserves clinical exploration, e.g., for preventing or reversing hair graying.
-------------------------------------

10018306_234 - 0.808017740578 - medicine
[sedation, immune]

Sedation & immunomodulation.
As the armamentarium for sedation in the critically ill expands, opportunities will develop to modulate the immune responses of patients by way of the direct immune and neural-immune interactions of the sedatives. Control of autonomic activity through the use of appropriate sedation may be critical in this matter. Likewise analgesic-based sedation, with increased opioid dosage, may not prove beneficial in the setting of infection; whether avoidance of morphine in preference for a fentanyl derivative will help is unclear. However, as the immune effects seem dependent on the m receptor, it is improbable that a significant difference would be uncovered. Similarly, the present evidence suggests benzodiazepines are deleterious in infection; further studies are required urgently to evaluate this evidence. As an alternative to benzodiazepine-based sedation, dexmedetomidine has shown a remarkable 70% mortality benefit in a small secondary analysis of septic patients from the MENDS trial. Further powered clinical studies should now be undertaken to investigate the potential benefit of the α2-adrenoceptor agonist in this setting, with comparisons with propofol.
-------------------------------------

10004725_234 - 0.884587700686 - science
[polymer, pile, fluid, property]

Properties and applications of polymer support fluids in geotechnical engineering
Synthetic polymer fluids have been used as an alternative to conventional bentoniteslurries for the excavation of foundation elements over the last two decades. Thus far their use has excited polarised views in the industry – some construction professionals avoid using them after hearing ‘horror stories’ about past failures whereas others believe that they are the future of support fluids because of the many benefits that they can offer. This situation has been found to be mainly due to a lack of understanding of what polymers really are and their properties. To address this issue, the various polymer products currently available in the market have been categorised based on their intended functions, and the fundamental properties of some of them have been characterised. The research showed that significant difference exists between polymers even of the same chemical family. Based on a series of rheological experiments, it was found that the properties of polymer fluids are highly dependent on the governing shear rate, time, and a range of site dependent factors. The research also showed that the current procedure for the interpretation of viscosity data is incorrect. After an analysis of the properties of currently available polymers, the latter part of the thesis describes a field trial carried out at a site in Stratford, East London. The aims of the trial were twofold: to compare the performance between piles constructed using bentonite and polymer fluids, and to assess the effect of extended pile bore open time for pile bores supported by polymers. From the results, it was found that the polymer piles showed much stiffer load–settlement response than the bentonite pile, and that a pile bore open time of up to 26 h had no adverse effect on the pile performance. The load test results have been carefully back-analysed using a range of methods. It was found that, compared to their bentonite counterparts, polymer fluids can improve the interface shearing resistance with Thanet Sand and the shear modulus of the Lambeth clay.
-------------------------------------

100099_102 - 0.797579881119 - education
[education, discipline, design, disciplinary]

Controlling the Discipline: Education, Intention, Assumption, Prejudice
<p>This paper explores, from a philosophical and speculative rather than empirical perspective, and within the design disciplines in general, the complex relationships, between practice and education, and their respective assumptions and prejudices. The paper begins by characterising design education from three perspectives: first, education 'about' the discipline, in the sense of providing information that explicates the general disciplinary ‘content’ and focus; second, education 'for' the discipline, which usually accords to notions of training; and third, education as the ‘instilling’ of discipline itself, the elucidation and establishment of rigour and control. It then explores the nature of disciplinary 'for practice' education and sets out the extensive range of presumptions which often underlies the relationship between education and practice. Examining the current relationship between disciplinary education and tertiary studies, the paper looks at critical inquiry and disciplinary research, before focusing on competing institutional values and their operational and material consequences.  The paper concludes with the example of architectural education's response to the demise of modernism, and at the lessons that might be learned from such educational change.
</p>
<p>
<strong>Keywords:</strong> <br />
design education; design philosophy; ideology; training; disciplinarity</p>
-------------------------------------

10010318_234 - 0.749784021322 - science
[mutagenesis, rational, random, engineering]

The future of industrial antibiotic production: From random mutagenesis to synthetic biology
atural products derived from the secondary metabolism of microbes constitute a cornerstone of modern medicine. Engineering bugs to produce these products in high quantities is a major challenge for biotechnology, which has usually been tackled by either one of two strategies: iterative random mutagenesis or rational design. Recently, we analyzed the transcriptome of a Streptomyces clavuligerus strain optimized for production of the ??-lactamase inhibitor clavulanic acid by multiple rounds of mutagenesis and selection, and discovered that the observed changes matched surprisingly well with simple changes that have been introduced into these strains by rational engineering. Here, we discuss how in the new field of synthetic biology, random mutagenesis and rational engineering can be implemented complementarily in ways which may enable one to go beyond the status quo that has now been reached by each method independently. ?? 2011 Landes Bioscience.
-------------------------------------

10006928_234 - 0.859371447381 - science
[opsin, response, andruzzius, nm, spectral, sensitivity]

Encephalic photoreception and phototactic response in the troglobiont Somalian blind cavefish Phreatichthys andruzzii.
Many physiological and behavioural responses to changes in environmental lighting conditions are mediated by extraocular photoreceptors. Here we investigate encephalic photoreception in Phreatichthys andruzzii, a typical cave-dwelling fish showing an extreme phenotype with complete anophthalmy and a reduction in size of associated brain structures. We firstly identified two P. andruzzii photopigments, orthologues of rod opsin and exo-rod opsin. In vitro, both opsins serve as light-absorbing photopigments with λ(max) around 500 nm when reconstituted with an A(1) chromophore. When corrected for the summed absorption from the skin and skull, the spectral sensitivity profiles shifted to longer wavelengths (rod opsin: 521 nm; exo-rod opsin: 520 nm). We next explored the involvement of both opsins in the negative phototaxis reported for this species. A comparison of the spectral sensitivity of the photophobic response with the putative A(2) absorbance spectra corrected for skin/skull absorbance indicates that the A(2) versions of either or both of these pigments could explain the observed behavioural spectral sensitivity.
-------------------------------------

10005560_234 - 0.860390468204 - medicine
[pulmonary, aspergillosis, chronic]

Too many mouldy joints - marijuana and chronic pulmonary aspergillosis.
Chronic pulmonary aspergillosis is a progressive debilitating disease with multiple underlying pulmonary diseases described. Here we report the association of chronic pulmonary aspergillosis and long term marijuana smoking in 2 patients and review the literature related to invasive and allergic aspergillosis.
-------------------------------------

10008765_234 - 0.840169550938 - science
[antifungal, qpcr, galactomannan, detection, class, significant, difference]

Antifungal treatment affects the laboratory diagnosis of invasive aspergillosis.
AIMS: The purpose of this study was to investigate the performance of non-invasive diagnostic tests such as galactomannan enzyme immunoassay and quantitative PCR in the early diagnosis of invasive aspergillosis (IA), and how these tests are impacted upon by the use of different classes of antifungal agents in an in-vivo model of IA. METHODS: A standardised rat inhalation model of IA was used to examine the effects of an azole, posaconazole, a polyene, amphotericin B and an echinocandin caspofungin. Daily blood samples were collected for subsequent analysis using a commercially available galactomannan assay and an inhouse qPCR assay. RESULTS: No significant differences were observed in the CE/g of Aspergillus fumigatus in the lungs of each group. qPCR was statistically more sensitive than galactomannan for both the early detection of infected controls (p=0.045) and for overall detection (p=0.018). However, antifungal treatment significantly reduced the overall sensitivity of qPCR (p=0.020); these effects were due to posaconazole and caspofungin. In the latter stages of infection (days 4 and 5) there were no significant differences in the numbers of infections detected by galactomannan and qPCR; however, the antifungal class used caused significant qualitative differences (p=0.041). Galactomannan showed improved detection in posaconazole-treated animals. CONCLUSIONS: Previous exposure to antifungal therapy must be considered when interpreting either qPCR or galactomannan-based IA diagnostics as this study has shown that individual classes of antifungal agents impact upon the dynamics of antigen and DNA release into the circulation.
-------------------------------------

10008616_234 - 0.840671401603 - science
[reactivity, chemical, allergen, respiratory, peptide, competitive, condition, selectivity, lysine, assay]

The selective peptide reactivity of chemical respiratory allergens under competitive and non-competitive conditions.
It is well established that certain chemicals cause respiratory allergy. In common with contact allergens, chemicals that induce sensitization of the respiratory tract must form stable associations with host proteins to elicit an immune response. Measurement of the reactivity of chemical allergens to single nucleophilic peptides is increasingly well-described, and standardized assays have been developed for use in hazard assessment. This study employed standard and modified peptide reactivity assays to investigate the selectivity of chemical respiratory allergens for individual amino acids under competitive and non-competitive conditions. The reactivity of 20 known chemical respiratory sensitizers (including diisocyanates, anhydrides, and reactive dyes) were evaluated for reactivity towards individual peptides containing cysteine, lysine, histidine, arginine, or tyrosine. Respiratory allergens exhibited the common ability to deplete both lysine and cysteine peptides; however, reactivity for histidine, arginine, and tyrosine varied between chemicals, indicating differences in relative binding affinity toward each nucleophile. To evaluate amino acid selectivity for cysteine and lysine under competitive conditions a modified assay was used in which reaction mixtures contained different relative concentrations of the target peptides. Under these reaction conditions, the binding preferences of reference respiratory and contact allergens (dinitrochlorobenzene, dinitrofluorobenzene) were evaluated. Discrete patterns of reactivity were observed showing various levels of competitive selectivity between the two allergen classes.
-------------------------------------

10007986_234 - 0.758433906024 - science
[microlensing]

MOA 2010-BLG-477Lb: Constraining the Mass of a Microlensing Planet from Microlensing Parallax, Orbital Motion, and Detection of Blended Light
DOI: 10.1088/0004-637X/754/1/73; eprintid: arXiv:1205.6323
-------------------------------------

10003766_234 - 0.755042057695 - technology_and_computing
[design, architecture, system]

Overview of the SpiNNaker System Architecture
SpiNNaker (a contraction of Spiking Neural Network Architecture) is a million-core computing engine whose flagship goal is to be able to simulate the behaviour of aggregates of up to a billion neurons in real time. It consists of an array of ARM9 cores, communicating via packets carried by a custom interconnect fabric. The packets are small (40 or 72 bits), and their transmission is brokered entirely by hardware, giving the overall engine an extremely high bisection bandwidth of over 5 billion packets/s. Three of the principle axioms of parallel machine design - memory coherence, synchronicity and determinism - have been discarded in the design without, surprisingly, compromising the ability to perform meaningful computations. A further attribute of the system is the acknowledgement, from the initial design stages, that the sheer size of the implementation will make component failures an inevitable aspect of day-to-day operation, and fault detection and recovery mechanisms have been built into the system at many levels of abstraction. This paper describes the architecture of the machine and outlines the underlying design philosophy; software and applications are to be described in detail elsewhere, and only introduced in passing here as necessary to illuminate the description.
-------------------------------------

10011018_234 - 0.781256947779 - science
[orientation, coccolith, uptake, calcite, trace, implication, growth, crystal, metal]

Calcite crystal growth orientation: Implications for trace metal uptake into coccoliths
cited By (since 1996) 0
-------------------------------------

10005596_234 - 0.95111921093 - medicine
[hypnotherapy, patient, ulceration, duodenal]

Controlled trial of hypnotherapy in relapse prevention of duodenal ulceration.
30 patients with rapidly relapsing duodenal ulceration were studied to assess the possible benefit of hypnotherapy in relapse prevention. After the ulcer had healed on treatment with ranitidine, the drug was continued for a further 10 weeks during which time patients received either hypnotherapy or no hypnotherapy. The two randomly selected groups were comparable in terms of age, sex, smoking habits, and alcohol consumption. Follow-up of both groups of patients was continued for 12 months after the cessation of ranitidine. After 1 year, 8 (53%) of the hypnotherapy patients and 15 (100%) of the control subjects had relapsed. The results of this study suggest that hypnotherapy may be a useful therapeutic adjunct for some patients with chronic recurrent duodenal ulceration.
-------------------------------------

10011849_234 - 0.792520651794 - finance
[equity, private]

Losing the battles but winning the war: the case of UK Private Equity Industry and mediated scandal of summer 2007
Private equity was heavily criticised by the media and trade unions during the Spring/Summer 2007, when the Treasury summoned a Selected Committee to quiz its top executives about the business’ practices. Despite losing the public argument, the Private Equity industry did not suffer any consequences, escaping with no significant policy changes affecting its modus operandi. Its remarkable lack of sophistication in gathering allies and dealing with politiciansand journalists alike diverges from part of the literature on business representation and its assumption that results are directly proportional to lobbying/public relations efforts, be it collectively or individually organised. The argument put forward here is that Private Equity’s victory was a consequence of its successful mobilization of existing ideological and structural conditions, leaving to the government the task of justifying any regulatory or tax changes.
-------------------------------------

10007520_234 - 0.802943895973 - science
[cell, hypoxic, abt-737, apoptosis, tumor, mcl-1, hypoxium]

Hypoxic human cancer cells are sensitized to BH-3 mimetic–induced apoptosis via downregulation of the Bcl-2 protein Mcl-1.
Solid tumors contain hypoxic regions in which cancer cells are often resistant to chemotherapy-induced apoptotic cell death. Therapeutic strategies that specifically target hypoxic cells and promote apoptosis are particularly appealing, as few normal tissues experience hypoxia. We have found that the compound ABT-737, a Bcl-2 homology domain 3 (BH-3) mimetic, promotes apoptotic cell death in human colorectal carcinoma and small cell lung cancer cell lines exposed to hypoxia. This hypoxic induction of apoptosis was mediated through downregulation of myeloid cell leukemia sequence 1 (Mcl-1), a Bcl-2 family protein that serves as a biomarker for ABT-737 resistance. Downregulation of Mcl-1 in hypoxia was independent of hypoxia-inducible factor 1 (HIF-1) activity and was consistent with decreased global protein translation. In addition, ABT-737 induced apoptosis deep within tumor spheroids, consistent with an optimal hypoxic oxygen tension being necessary to promote ABT-737–induced cell death. Tumor xenografts in ABT-737–treated mice also displayed significantly more apoptotic cells within hypoxic regions relative to normoxic regions. Synergies between ABT-737 and other cytotoxic drugs were maintained in hypoxia, suggesting that this drug may be useful in combination with chemotherapeutic agents. Taken together, these findings suggest that Mcl-1–sparing BH-3 mimetics may induce apoptosis in hypoxic tumor cells that are resistant to other chemotherapeutic agents and may have a role in combinatorial chemotherapeutic regimens for treatment of solid tumors.
-------------------------------------

10017032_234 - 0.947442893342 - medicine
[dementia, patient, treatment, memantine, disease]

Pharmacological treatment of dementia.
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: In this article, we discuss new data on currently licensed drugs for dementia and novel developments in the management of neuropsychiatric symptoms in patients with dementia. RECENT FINDINGS: During the last years, a large body of evidence has been accumulated to support the use of antidementia medication in patients with severe Alzheimer's disease. Combination therapy with acetylcholinesterase inhibitors and memantine for Alzheimer's disease remains controversial, as controlled trials have yielded conflicting results. Memantine is not indicated in patients with mild Alzheimer's disease. Studies on memantine for Parkinson's disease dementia and dementia with Lewy bodies were inconclusive. In adult patients with dementia in the context of Down syndrome, memantine is not effective, and further studies on acetylcholinesterase inhibitors are warranted. There is still no treatment established for patients with vascular or frontotemporal dementia. The efficacy of antidepressants to treat depression associated with dementia is not proven. Treatment of agitation and psychosis in patients with dementia remains a challenge. SUMMARY: Recent systematic clinical reviews and new research on currently available treatment options provide valuable assistance for clinicians to deal with frequent clinical problems in the context of dementia.
-------------------------------------

10003264_234 - 0.835609297668 - science
[hf, human, hair, pigmentation]

A neuroendocrinological perspective on human hair follicle pigmentation.
The role of neurohormones and neuropeptides in human hair follicle (HF) pigmentation extends far beyond the control of melanin synthesis by α-MSH and ACTH and includes melanoblast differentiation, reactive oxygen species scavenging, maintenance of HF immune privilege, and remodeling of the HF pigmentary unit (HFPU). It is now clear that human HFs are not only a target of multiple neuromediators, but also are a major non-classical production site for neurohormones such as CRH, proopiomelanocortin, ACTH, α-MSH, ß-endorphin, TRH, and melatonin. Moreover, human HFs have established a functional peripheral equivalent of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis. By charting the author's own meanderings through the jungle of hair pigmentation research, the current perspectives essay utilizes four clinical observations - hair repigmentation, canities, poliosis, and 'overnight greying'- as points of entry into the enigmas and challenges of .pigmentary HF neuroendocrinology. After synthesizing key principles and defining major open questions in the field, selected research avenues are delineated that appear clinically most promising. In this context, novel neuroendocrinological strategies to retard or reverse greying and to reduce damage to the HFPU are discussed.
-------------------------------------

10007529_234 - 0.96703984964 - medicine
[g-csf, patient, ctrt, thrombocytopenia, grade, datum, radiotherapy, lung, cancer, trial]

Use of G-CSF during concurrent chemotherapy and thoracic radiotherapy in patients with limited-stage small-cell lung cancer safety data from a phase II trial.
There is paucity of data in the literature regarding the safety of combining granulocyte colony stimulating factor (G-CSF) during chemo-radiotherapy (CTRT) in lung cancer patients. The ASCO 2006 recommendations advise against use of CSFs during concomitant mediastinal CTRT. The only randomised study evaluating CSFs in this context showed significant increase in grade 3/4 thrombocytopenia and an excess of pulmonary toxic deaths. In the context of a phase II trial, 38 patients with limited-stage small cell lung cancer were randomised to receive once-daily (66 Gy in 33 fractions) or twice-daily (45 Gy in 30 fractions) radiotherapy. Radiotherapy (RT) was given concurrently with cisplatin and etoposide. G-CSF was given as primary or secondary prophylaxis or as a therapeutic measure during an episode of febrile neutropenia according to local protocols. Common terminology criteria for adverse events (CTCAE) v3.0 was used to record toxicity. Thirteen (34%) of 38 patients received G-CSF concurrently with RT. With a median follow-up of 16.9 months, there were no treatment related deaths reported. Seven (54%) patients experienced grade 3/4 thrombocytopenia and 5 (38%) experienced grade 3/4 anaemia. Thirty-one percent required platelet transfusions. No episodes of bleeding were observed. There were no cases of grade 3/4 acute pneumonitis. These data suggests that with modern three-dimensional (3D) conformal RT, G-CSF administration concurrently with CTRT does not result in the increase risk of pulmonary toxicity, but does increase the risk of thrombocytopenia. Whether the risks of thrombocytopenia are outweighed by the outcome of timely early concurrent CTRT is being evaluated prospectively in the ongoing phase III CONVERT trial (NCT00433563) in which G-CSF is permitted during thoracic irradiation.
-------------------------------------

10008285_234 - 0.78010968628 - science
[particle, single, different, gpu, simulation, sub-domain, sph]

Towards accelerating Smoothed Particle Hydrodynamics simulations for free-surface flows on multi-GPU clusters
Starting from the single graphics processing unit (GPU) version of the Smoothed Particle Hydrodynamics (SPH) code DualSPHysics, a multi-GPU SPH program is developed for free-surface flows. The approach is based on a spatial decomposition technique, whereby different portions (sub-domains) of the physical system under study are assigned to different GPUs. Communication between devices is achieved with the use of Message Passing Interface (MPI) application programming interface (API) routines. The use of the sorting algorithm radix sort for inter-GPU particle migration and sub-domain “halo” building (which enables interaction between SPH particles of different sub-domains) is described in detail. With the resulting scheme it is possible, on the one hand, to carry out simulations that could also be performed on a single GPU, but they can now be performed even faster than on one of these devices alone. On the other hand, accelerated simulations can be performed with up to 32 million particles on the current architecture, which is beyond the limitations of a single GPU due to memory constraints. A study of weak and strong scaling behaviour, speedups and efficiency of the resulting program is presented including an investigation to elucidate the computational bottlenecks. Last, possibilities for reduction of the effects of overhead on computational efficiency in future versions of our scheme are discussed.
-------------------------------------

10017169_234 - 0.761316939576 - medicine
[drug, alzheimer, trial, disease, clinical]

Drug repositioning for Alzheimer's disease.
Existing drugs for Alzheimer's disease provide symptomatic benefit for up to 12 months, but there are no approved disease-modifying therapies. Given the recent failures of various novel disease-modifying therapies in clinical trials, a complementary strategy based on repositioning drugs that are approved for other indications could be attractive. Indeed, a substantial body of preclinical work indicates that several classes of such drugs have potentially beneficial effects on Alzheimer's-like brain pathology, and for some drugs the evidence is also supported by epidemiological data or preliminary clinical trials. Here, we present a formal consensus evaluation of these opportunities, based on a systematic review of published literature. We highlight several compounds for which sufficient evidence is available to encourage further investigation to clarify an optimal dose and consider progression to clinical trials in patients with Alzheimer's disease.
-------------------------------------

10008114_234 - 0.832324434017 - medicine
[drug, surgery, bariatric, oral, trend]

Trends in oral drug bioavailability following bariatric surgery: examining the variable extent of impact on exposure of different drug classes.
UNLABELLED: WHAT IS ALREADY KNOWN ABOUT THIS SUBJECT • Changes to oral drug bioavailability have been observed post bariatric surgery. However, the magnitude and the direction of changes have not been assessed systematically to provide insights into the parameters governing the observed trends. Understanding these can help with dose adjustments. WHAT THIS STUDY ADDS • Analysis of drug characteristics based on a biopharmaceutical classification system is not adequate to explain observed trends in altered oral drug bioavailability following bariatric surgery, although the findings suggest solubility to play an important role. AIMS: To identify the most commonly prescribed drugs in a bariatric surgery population and to assess existing evidence regarding trends in oral drug bioavailability post bariatric surgery. METHODS: A retrospective audit was undertaken to document commonly prescribed drugs amongst patients undergoing bariatric surgery in an NHS hospital in the UK and to assess practice for drug administration following bariatric surgery. The available literature was examined for trends relating to drug permeability and solubility with regards to the Biopharmaceutics Classification System (BCS) and main route of elimination. RESULTS: No significant difference in the 'post/pre surgery oral drug exposure ratio' (ppR) was apparent between BCS class I to IV drugs, with regards to dose number (Do) or main route of elimination. Drugs classified as 'solubility limited' displayed an overall reduction as compared with 'freely soluble' compounds, as well as an unaltered and increased ppR. CONCLUSION: Clinical studies establishing guidelines for commonly prescribed drugs, and the monitoring of drugs exhibiting a narrow therapeutic window or without a readily assessed clinical endpoint, are warranted. Using mechanistically based pharmacokinetic modelling for simulating the multivariate nature of changes in drug exposure may serve as a useful tool in the further understanding of postoperative trends in oral drug exposure and in developing practical clinical guidance.
-------------------------------------

10010330_234 - 0.92362944947 - science
[metabolomic, leishmania, research]

The potential of metabolomics for Leishmania research in the post-genomics era
The post-genomics era has provided researchers with access to a new generation of tools for the global characterization and understanding of pathogen diversity. This review provides a critical summary of published Leishmania post-genomic research efforts to date, and discusses the potential impact of the addition of metabolomics to the post-genomic toolbox. Metabolomics aims at understanding biology by comprehensive metabolite profiling. We present an overview of the design and interpretation of metabolomics experiments in the context of Leishmania research. Sample preparation, measurement techniques, and bioinformatics analysis of the generated complex datasets are discussed in detail. To illustrate the concepts and the expected results of metabolomics analyses, we also present an overview of comparative metabolic profiles of drug-sensitive and drug-resistant Leishmania donovani clinical isolates. Copyright ?? 2010 Cambridge University Press.
-------------------------------------

10003471_234 - 0.883700489362 - science
[ca2, astrocyte, gliotransmission, ncx, cyt, release]

Plasmalemmal Na+/Ca2+ exchanger modulates Ca2+-dependent exocytotic release of glutamate from rat cortical astrocytes.
Astroglial excitability operates through increases in Ca2+cyt (cytosolic Ca2+), which can lead to glutamatergic gliotransmission. In parallel fluctuations in astrocytic Na+cyt (cytosolic Na+) control metabolic neuronal-glial signalling, most notably through stimulation of lactate production, which on release from astrocytes can be taken up and utilized by nearby neurons, a process referred to as lactate shuttle. Both gliotransmission and lactate shuttle play a role in modulation of synaptic transmission and plasticity. Consequently, we studied the role of the PMCA (plasma membrane Ca2+-ATPase), NCX (plasma membrane Na+/Ca2+ exchanger) and NKA (Na+/K+-ATPase) in complex and coordinated regulation of Ca2+cyt and Na+cyt in astrocytes at rest and upon mechanical stimulation. Our data support the notion that NKA and PMCA are the major Na+ and Ca2+ extruders in resting astrocytes. Surprisingly, the blockade of NKA or PMCA appeared less important during times of Ca2+ and Na+ cytosolic loads caused by mechanical stimulation. Unexpectedly, NCX in reverse mode appeared as a major contributor to overall Ca2+ and Na+ homoeostasis in astrocytes both at rest and when these glial cells were mechanically stimulated. In addition, NCX facilitated mechanically induced Ca2+-dependent exocytotic release of glutamate from astrocytes. These findings help better understanding of astrocyte-neuron bidirectional signalling at the tripartite synapse and/or microvasculature. We propose that NCX operating in reverse mode could be involved in fast and spatially localized Ca2+-dependent gliotransmission, that would operate in parallel to a slower and more widely distributed gliotransmission pathway that requires metabotropically controlled Ca2+ release from the ER (endoplasmic reticulum).
-------------------------------------

10004317_234 - 0.733001865264 - technology_and_computing
[visualization, datum, environment, technique, visual, brushing, interactive, clustering, binning, prototype]

‘Multi View Graphing’: Linked Multi Visualization utilising Brushing, Binning and Clustering
Visualization can provide a distinctly advantageous overview of data, enabling the rapid identification of anomalies, patterns or correlations that would not otherwise be obvious. Different visualization techniques each offer their own unique insight into the same data; however the similarities that exist between them are not always clear. High data density can also be a very evident issue when exploring data using visualization. The densest datasets can ensure that even well suited visualization methodologies succumb to usability issues. The most powerful data analysis environments are arguably those that provide interactive exploration, however visual feedback in such environments is sometimes undesirably limited. The concept of linking different visualization styles using interactive techniques, such as brushing, is currently evident in multiple publically available software environments. To explore the concept of linked visualization a prototype application was produced, allowing up to four unique visual styles to be generated using the same data, at the same time. Current brushing methodologies were extended and included, in order to provide the ability to affect each visualization from within every other. The issue of data density was tackled through the use of a novel approach to binning based around a uniform grid. Visual cues were used extensively throughout the prototype, ranging from representing a brushing area through to defining the basic starting parameters of a clustering algorithm. Three distinctly different test cases are presented to demonstrate the techniques showcased within the prototype, each in conjunction with external collaborators. Results suggest that using linked multi visualization is a more effective method of data analysis, offering greater insight than using a lone visualization technique. In tackling data density, the grid based binning has the ability to offer an easily disseminated overview of even extremely cluttered visualizations. The extensive use of visual cues in the prototype vindicated the theory that offering clear feedback within interactive environments is of the utmost importance. Also the interactive definition of clustering parameters via visual cues shows promise as a concept but one requiring further research. This study highlights that the current trend towards linking multiple visualization techniques within advanced data analysis environments is correct; it also introduces novel brushing, binning and clustering concepts worthy of further investigation.
-------------------------------------

10011376_234 - 0.883074796369 - science
[graphene]

Scanning tunnelling microscopy of suspended graphene
Suspended graphene has been studied by STM for the first time. Atomic resolution on mono- and bi-layer graphene samples has been obtained after ridding the graphene surface of contamination via high-temperature annealing. Static local corrugations (ripples) have been observed on both types of structures.
-------------------------------------

10011392_234 - 0.930024076893 - medicine
[sexual, treatment, patient, function, fga, schizophrenia, antipsychotic, sga, drug]

Sexual function of patients with schizophrenia receiving first-generation (FGA) or second-generation antipsychotic (SGA) treatment.
OBJECTIVES: The aim of the study was to investigate sexual function in patients with schizophrenia receiving treatment with a first-generation antipsychotic (FGA) or a second-generation antipsychotic (SGA) drug. Sexual function is an important aspect of human experience, which can be affected by antipsychotic drug treatment. Sexual dysfunction in patients with schizophrenia may be less prevalent with SGA than with FGA drug treatment. METHODS: A cross-sectional prevalence study assessed sexual function in a sample of 144 patients with DSM-IV schizophrenia aged between 18 and 65, using the Derogatis Interview for Sexual Functioning (self-report version: DISF-SR). Two equal-sized groups (N = 72) received treatment with an FGA or an SGA drug for at least 12 weeks. RESULTS: No significant differences were seen on DISF-SR total score or subscale score between the two treatment groups. CONCLUSIONS: There are no differences in measured sexual function of non-randomised patients with schizophrenia treated with an FGA compared with SGA-treated patients.
-------------------------------------

10008078_234 - 0.840099918436 - science
[carbon, soil, below-ground, root, sequestration]

Large-scale sequestration of carbon via plant roots in natural and agricultural ecosystems: why and how
The soil holds twice as much carbon as does the atmosphere, and most soil carbon is derived from recent photosynthesis that takes carbon into root structures and further into below-ground storage via exudates therefrom. Nonetheless, many natural and most agricultural crops have roots that extend only to about 1 m below ground. What determines the lifetime of below-ground C in various forms is not well understood, and understanding these processes is therefore key to optimising them for enhanced C sequestration. Most soils (and especially subsoils) are very far from being saturated with organic carbon, and calculations show that the amounts of C that might further be sequestered (http://dbkgroup.org/carbonsequestration/rootsystem.html) are actually very great. Breeding crops with desirable below-ground C sequestration traits, and exploiting attendant agronomic practices optimised for individual species in their relevant environments, are therefore important goals. These bring additional benefits related to improvements in soil structure and in the usage of other nutrients and water.
-------------------------------------

10008175_234 - 0.909819230816 - medicine
[response, amygdalum, patient, treatment, emotion, sad, depressed, face, specific, remission]

Increased amygdala responses to sad but not fearful faces in major depression: relation to mood state and pharmacological treatment.
OBJECTIVE: Increased amygdala response to negative emotions seen in functional MRI (fMRI) has been proposed as a biomarker for negative emotion processing bias underlying depressive symptoms and vulnerability to depressive relapse that are normalized by antidepressant drug treatment. The purpose of this study was to determine whether abnormal amygdala responses to face emotions in depression are related to specific emotions or change in response to antidepressant treatment and whether they are present as a stable trait in medication-free patients in remission. METHOD: Sixty-two medication-free unipolar depressed patients (38 were currently depressed, and 24 were in remission) and 54 healthy comparison subjects underwent an indirect face-emotion processing task during fMRI. Thirty-two currently depressed patients were treated with the antidepressant citalopram for 8 weeks. Adherence to treatment was evaluated by measuring citalopram plasma concentrations. RESULTS: Patients with current depression had increased bilateral amygdala responses specific to sad faces relative to healthy comparison subjects and nonmedicated patients in stable remission. Treatment with citalopram abolished the abnormal amygdala responses to sad faces in currently depressed patients but did not alter responses to fearful faces. CONCLUSIONS: Aberrant amygdala activation in response to sad facial emotions is specific to the depressed state and is a potential biomarker for a negative affective bias during a depressive episode.
-------------------------------------

10011279_234 - 0.702202191893 - technology_and_computing
[system, fault, detection]

A statistical-based approach for fault detection in a three tank system
Fault detection in stochastic dynamical systems is usually carried out by the generation of residuals directly reflecting the magnitude of the faults. For this purpose, faults indicator is used to evaluate possible deviations from the normal operating conditions and the measurements of the system. This evaluation is often very difficult to implement in the multi-faults case. This article aims to demonstrate the efficiency of the coefficient of variation (CV) in detecting single and multi-faults in a multivariable laboratory three tank system DTS-200. The performance of the detection algorithm is based on the computation of the confidence intervals (CIs) which provide an estimate of the amount of error in the considered data and characterise the precision of the computed statistical estimates. The data variability may result from random measurement errors caused by the system parameters uncertainties, internal and external noises, and measuring instrument, which are not usually accurate. The CIs make the CV less sensitive to parameter uncertainties and to measure noises. The robustness and accuracy of the CV are shown in a healthy mode and various faulty situations in an entirely uncertain environment.
-------------------------------------

10017082_234 - 0.891959402834 - science
[photoageing, consequence, protein, extracellular, ultraviolet, skin, differential]

Chemical consequences of cutaneous photoageing.
Human skin, in common with other organs, ages as a consequence of the passage of time, but in areas exposed to solar ultraviolet radiation, the effects of this intrinsic ageing process are exacerbated. In particular, both the severity and speed of onset of age-related changes, such as wrinkle formation and loss of elasticity, are enhanced in photoaged (also termed extrinsically aged) as compared with aged, photoprotected, skin. The anatomy of skin is characterised by two major layers: an outer, avascular, yet highly cellular and dynamic epidermis and an underlying vascularised, comparatively static and cell-poor, dermis. The structural consequences of photoageing are mainly evident in the extracellular matrix-rich but cell-poor dermis where key extracellular matrix proteins are particularly susceptible to photodamage. Most investigations to date have concentrated on the cell as both a target for and mediator of, ultraviolet radiation-induced photoageing. As the main effectors of dermal remodelling produced by cells (extracellular proteases) generally have low substrate specificity, we recently suggested that the differential susceptibility of key extracellular matrix proteins to the processes of photoageing may be due to direct, as opposed to cell-mediated, photodamage.In this review, we discuss the experimental evidence for ultraviolet radiation (and related reactive oxygen species)-mediated differential degradation of normally long lived dermal proteins including the fibrillar collagens, elastic fibre components, glycoproteins and proteoglycans. Whilst these components exhibit highly diverse primary and hence macro- and supra-molecular structures, we present evidence that amino acid composition alone may be a useful predictor of age-related protein degradation in both photoexposed and, as a consequence of differential oxidation sensitivity, photoprotected, tissues.
-------------------------------------

10005548_234 - 0.809251940526 - medicine
[disease, crohn, acid, patient]

Gastric function in Crohn's disease.
Gastric acid secretion before and after stimulation with pentagastrin assessed in 11 patients with Crohn's disease. Age and sex-matched patients with ulcerative colitis and healthy controls were used for comparison. Basal acid output was found to be significantly elevated in patients with Crohn's disease who had had surgery (P less than 0.01). This elevation was related to ileal resection rather than ileal disease. There was no difference in the maximal or peak acid outputs between any of the groups.
-------------------------------------

10007495_234 - 0.851374206342 - medicine
[cough, cancer, lung, patient, management, symptom]

Understanding cough and its management in lung cancer.
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: This article summarizes the current understanding of cough in lung cancer, strategies for its management and highlights areas where further research is warranted.Cough is common, severe and distressing for many lung cancer patients. Currently few effective cough interventions exist for lung cancer patients. This review proposes some of the mechanisms that may underlie cough in lung cancer and presents the existing data on antitussive therapy in cancer patients. A greater focus on the cough mechanisms may enable effective antitussives to be developed in the future for lung cancer patients. A brief overview of the validated cough assessment tools is provided. The use of such tools will enable robust clinical endpoints to be determined for future cough intervention studies. A 'cough treatment pyramid' is presented to provide a pragmatic approach to the management of cough in lung cancer patients. RECENT FINDINGS: Despite the small number of publications on cough in lung cancer, some recent research has characterized cough for the first time in lung cancer patients. Its impact on quality of life domains such as psychological, social and physical is significant. The lung cancer symptom cluster of cough, breathlessness and fatigue has also been described. A recently developed cough severity assessment tool has provided researchers with a short well validated seven-item questionnaire to determine this important cough characteristic. In addition, a Cochrane Database Systematic Review on Interventions for Cough in Cancer has also been published. These studies are all described in the present review. Understanding the impact of a symptom such as cough, the assessment of cough and its potential underlying mechanisms is crucial if we are to manage this symptom effectively. SUMMARY: Current cough management in lung cancer patients is lagging behind the management of other cancer symptoms. There is now an increasing need to diagnose and treat cough more effectively, as lung cancer patients are living longer with chronic symptoms such as cough.
-------------------------------------

10005274_234 - 0.759300362136 - science
[tissue, fascia, hand]

The microvacuolar system: how connective tissue sliding works.
The term 'fascia' has been applied to a large number of very different tissues within the hand. These range from aligned ligamentous formations such as the longitudinal bands of the palmar fascia or Grayson's and Cleland's ligaments, to the loose packing tissues that surround all of the moving structures within the hand. In other parts of the body the terms 'superficial' and 'deep fascia' are often used but these have little application in the hand and fingers. Fascia can be divided into tissues that restrain motion, act as anchors for the skin, or provide lubrication and gliding. Whereas the deep fascia is preserved and easily characterized in anatomical dissection, the remaining fascial tissue is poorly described. Understanding its structure and dynamic anatomy may help improve outcomes after hand injury and disease. This review describes the sliding tissue of the hand or the 'microvacuolar system' and demonstrates how movement of tissues can occur with minimal distortion of the overlying skin while maintaining tissue continuity.
-------------------------------------

10009726_234 - 0.960869287276 - medicine
[clinical, fus, patient, ftld, aftld-u, mutation, gene, distinct, dementia, frontotemporal]

The most common type of FTLD-FUS (aFTLD-U) is associated with a distinct clinical form of frontotemporal dementia but is not related to mutations in the FUS gene.
Frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD) is clinically, pathologically and genetically heterogeneous. Recent descriptions of a pathological sub-type that is ubiquitin positive, TDP-43 negative and immunostains positive for the Fused in Sarcoma protein (FUS) raises the question whether it is associated with a distinct clinical phenotype identifiable on clinical grounds, and whether mutations in the Fused in Sarcoma gene (FUS) might also be associated with FTLD. Examination of a pathological series of 118 cases of FTLD from two centres, showing tau-negative, ubiquitin-positive pathology, revealed FUS pathology in five patients, four classified as atypical FTLD with ubiquitin inclusions (aFTLD-U), and one as neuronal intermediate filament inclusion disease (NIFID). The aFTLD-U cases had youthful onset (22-46 years), an absence of strong family history, a behavioural syndrome consistent with frontotemporal dementia (FTD) and severe caudate atrophy. Their cognitive/behavioural profile was distinct, characterised by prominent obsessionality, repetitive behaviours and rituals, social withdrawal and lack of engagement, hyperorality with pica, and marked stimulus-bound behaviour including utilisation behaviour. They conformed to the rare behavioural sub-type of FTD identified previously by us as the "stereotypic" form, and linked to striatal pathology. Cognitive evaluation revealed executive deficits in keeping with subcortical-frontal dysfunction, but no cortical deficits in language, perceptuospatial skills or praxis. The patient with NIFID was older and exhibited aphasia and dyspraxia. No patient had clinical evidence of motor neurone disease during life, or a mutation in the FUS gene. In the complementary clinical study of 312 patients with clinical syndromes of FTLD, genetic analysis revealed a 6 bp deletion in FUS in 3 patients, of questionable significance. One presented a prototypical picture of FTD, another expressive language disorder, and the third semantic dementia. None showed the early onset age or distinctive 'stereotypic' picture of patients with aFTLD-U. We conclude that aFTLD-U is associated with a distinct clinical form of frontotemporal dementia, potentially allowing identification of such patients in life with a high degree of precision. Whether mutations in the FUS gene cause some cases of FTLD remains unresolved.
-------------------------------------

10004698_234 - 0.765935979991 - science
[approach, species, chloroplast, independent, plant, genome, phylogenetic]

Chloroplast genome phylogenetics: why we need independent approaches to plant molecular evolution.
The traditional approach to plant molecular phylogenetics involves amplifying, sequencing and analyzing one or a few genes from many species and is conducive to broad taxon sampling. An independent approach involves chloroplast genome sequencing, providing much larger amounts of data per taxon but for a smaller number of species. In principle, the two strategies can inform each other but in practice their results sometimes conflict for reasons that are currently debated. An Opinion article published in the October 2004 issue of Trends in Plant Science cautioned against the pursuit of genome-based phylogenies. Here, we provide a different perspective on issues at the heart of the current debate and defend the use of chloroplast genome phylogenetics for crucial species because it provides an independent test of hypotheses generated by the traditional approach.
-------------------------------------

10011836_234 - 0.768498185721 - science
[susceptibility, psoriasis, response, genetic, psoriatic, disease, locus, arthritis, study, treatment]

Genetic susceptibility to psoriasis and psoriatic arthritis: implications for therapy.
The era of genome-wide association studies has revolutionized the search for genetic susceptibility loci in complex genetic conditions such as psoriasis. There are currently 16 loci with confirmed evidence for association with psoriasis susceptibility but there is the potential for more to be discovered as the genetic heritability of the disease has not yet been fully explained. Many of the associated loci overlap with those for psoriatic arthritis. In contrast to psoriasis susceptibility, few studies have been performed to identify predictors of drug response in psoriasis. As large-scale collaborations and registries for psoriasis and psoriatic arthritis are established, it is likely that a genome-wide approach may be used as a more effective method of searching for genetic predictors of treatment response. However, candidate gene studies will still have a role; for example, it is likely that some disease susceptibility genes will also be markers of treatment response, based on evidence from other diseases. This review summarizes recent advances in investigating the role genetics plays in psoriasis susceptibility and contrasts these to advances made in psoriatic arthritis. Further, it describes the genetics of treatment response in the two diseases and indicates how susceptibility loci could be used to identify drug response in the future.
-------------------------------------

10009525_234 - 0.755042057695 - technology_and_computing
[design, architecture, system]

Overview of the SpiNNaker System Architecture
SpiNNaker (a contraction of Spiking Neural Network Architecture) is a million-core computing engine whose flagship goal is to be able to simulate the behaviour of aggregates of up to a billion neurons in real time. It consists of an array of ARM9 cores, communicating via packets carried by a custom interconnect fabric. The packets are small (40 or 72 bits), and their transmission is brokered entirely by hardware, giving the overall engine an extremely high bisection bandwidth of over 5 billion packets/s. Three of the principle axioms of parallel machine design - memory coherence, synchronicity and determinism - have been discarded in the design without, surprisingly, compromising the ability to perform meaningful computations. A further attribute of the system is the acknowledgement, from the initial design stages, that the sheer size of the implementation will make component failures an inevitable aspect of day-to-day operation, and fault detection and recovery mechanisms have been built into the system at many levels of abstraction. This paper describes the architecture of the machine and outlines the underlying design philosophy; software and applications are to be described in detail elsewhere, and only introduced in passing here as necessary to illuminate the description.
-------------------------------------

10003890_234 - 0.82602164337 - science
[copd, aix, arterial, stiffness, fvc, association, subject, fev]

Is chronic obstructive pulmonary disease associated with increased arterial stiffness?
OBJECTIVE: We hypothesize that airflow limitation is associated with increasing arterial stiffness and that having COPD increases a non-invasive measure of arterial stiffness - the aortic augmentation index (AIx) - independently of other CVD risk factors. METHODS: This population study is based on 3374 subjects from the Copenhagen City Heart Study; 494 had COPD. We used multiple linear regression analyses to examine the association between COPD and AIx adjusted for CVD risk factors. Furthermore, we analyzed the association between AIx and FEV(1), FVC and FEV(1)/FVC in the entire population. RESULTS: AIx was higher in subjects with COPD than in subjects without: 25.7 vs. 21.0 (p < 0.001) in men and 33.6 vs. 29.4 (p < 0.001) in women. We found no increase in AIx with COPD adjusted for CVD risk factors: difference 0.63 (-0.26 to 1.52, p = 0.16). In sensitivity analyses in subjects younger than 60 years with exclusion of mild COPD from the analyses, COPD was associated with an increase in AIx in men only of 4.1 (0.88-7.22, p = 0.007). AIx had a curvilinear association with FEV(1) and FVC but no association with the FEV(1)/FVC ratio. CONCLUSION: AIx and COPD are only weakly associated. In the general population, this finding argues against increased arterial stiffness, as measured by AIx, being a complication of COPD.
-------------------------------------

10004772_234 - 0.813468716543 - technology_and_computing
[fpga, 3-d]

A Software-Supported Methodology for Exploring Interconnection Architectures Targeting 3-D FPGAs
Interconnect structures significantly contribute to the delay, power consumption, and silicon area of modern reconfigurable architectures. The demand for higher clock frequencies and logic densities is also important for the field-programmable gate array (FPGA) paradigm. Three-dimensional (3-D) integration can alleviate such performance limitations by accommodating a number of additional silicon layers. However, the benefits of 3-D integration have yet to be sufficiently investigated. In this paper, we propose a software-supported methodology to explore and evaluate 3-D FPGAs fabricated with alternative technologies. Based on the evaluation results, the proposed FPGA device improves speed and energy dissipation by approximately 38% and 26%, respectively, as compared to 2-D FPGAs. Furthermore, these gains are achieved in addition to reducing the interlayer connections, as compared to existing design approaches, leading to cheaper and more reliable architectures
-------------------------------------

10003649_234 - 0.967388992431 - medicine
[stroke, nurse, patient, ward, attitude, nursing, medical, general]

A reassessment of nurses' attitudes towards stroke patients in general medical wards.
This paper summarizes a research study inquiring into the attitudes of qualified nursing staff and nursing auxiliaries towards stroke patients in general medical wards. The survey was undertaken on eight mixed-sex general medical wards in a large general hospital. All wards are used for clinical nursing experience for nurses in training. Each of the wards, despite having a particular interest in one or more medical specialities, regularly admit patients following stroke. All nurses were therefore familiar and in regular contact with this particular client group. A Likert scale with demonstrated reliability and validity was employed as the data collection instrument. Results indicated that nurses were largely ambivalent in their attitudes towards stroke rehabilitation. The patterns of responses indicate that the nurses who have the more positive attitudes about stroke patients consider that they have a role in stroke rehabilitation and that they value the nursing contribution. The nurses with less positive attitudes towards stroke patients see stroke patients as unco-operative and demanding. The findings suggest the need for specific education for the role of the nurse as a rehabilitator.
-------------------------------------

10017097_234 - 0.809019179279 - medicine
[biologic, register, psoriasis, patient, study, datum, cohort, bad, therapy, conventional]

The British Association of Dermatologists' Biologic Interventions Register (BADBIR): design, methodology and objectives.
BACKGROUND: The British Association of Dermatologists (BAD) established a web-based pharmacovigilance register to assess the long-term safety of biologics prescribed for patients with severe psoriasis in September 2007. The BAD Biologic Interventions Register (BADBIR) also participates in the network of European psoriasis biologics registers (Psonet). OBJECTIVES: This prospective observational cohort study compares adult patients with psoriasis treated with biologics vs. a comparator group exposed to conventional systemic therapies. METHODS: Following baseline data acquisition, clinicians record changes in therapy, disease activity and adverse events for 5years (6-monthly for 3years, then annually thereafter). Patient details are flagged lifelong on the National Health Service Information Centre system to capture occurrence of malignancy or death. Primary study endpoints include malignancy, infection, serious adverse events and death. Collection of long-term effectiveness data is a subsidiary aim. RESULTS: By November 2011, the number of dermatology centres actively recruiting across the U.K. and Republic of Ireland had risen to 108 and a further 37 were actively engaged in the set-up process. Of the 3176 patients enrolled in the study to date, 2193 were registered within the biologic cohort and 983 in the conventional systemic (nonbiologic-exposed) cohort. CONCLUSIONS: A robust, high-quality, web-based register of biologic and conventional therapy for psoriasis has been established in the U.K. This is the largest project undertaken by the BAD. The data it will provide over the coming years will be invaluable to the safe use of biologics in clinical practice. A U.K.-wide dermatology clinical research network has been established that provides a framework for future studies in other diseases.
-------------------------------------

10011577_234 - 0.824299782844 - science
[ester, liquid, discharge, voltage, breakdown, propagation, transformer]

Electrical Performance of Ester Insulating Liquids for Power Transformers
Ester insulating liquids, including both synthetic and natural esters, have been intensively studied in recent years, because the good biodegradability and high fire safety of these liquids bring the potential for manufacturers to produce and utilities to operate transformers which have lower intrinsic environmental risks. Depending on the application, transformers filled with ester liquids either directly reduce the environmental risk or allow reductions in the costs associated with the provision of additional environmental protection or leak mitigation. A collective research effort has been undertaken by the UK electric power industry on ester liquids to determine their suitability for use in higher voltage power transformers. This paper focuses on the electrical performance of ester liquids. Experimental tests investigating discharge initiation, propagation and breakdown under both AC and lightning impulse voltages in non-uniform fields were carried out on a synthetic ester and a natural ester, using mineral oil as the benchmark for comparison. The results indicate similar discharge inception levels for all three types of liquid, however discharge propagation characteristics (discharge amplitude and number, streamer length and velocity) were found to be different and somewhat worse for esters compared with mineral oil. The tests also showed that ester liquids have relatively lower breakdown strengths than mineral oil. In addition, it was found that a pressboard surface does not influence streamer propagation and breakdown under lightning impulse voltage, but it does promote propagation and breakdown under AC voltage stress, particularly on discharges occurring in the negative half cycle. These differences in the behaviour of ester liquids would probably need to be taken into account in the design of transformers at higher voltages.
-------------------------------------

10007513_234 - 0.967880453864 - medicine
[nsclc, antivascular, patient, treatment, therapy, agent]

Antivascular agents for non-small-cell lung cancer: current status and future directions.
BACKGROUND: Despite improvements in surgery and chemo(radio)therapy which have allowed for modest advances in the treatment of patients with non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC), survival remains poor and further improvements are needed. Attention over recent years has focused, therefore, on targeted therapies, with notable success in the development of antivascular drugs. OBJECTIVE: To summarize the current knowledge on antivascular therapy in patients with NSCLC. METHOD: Review of randomized controlled trials exploring treatment of NSCLC patients with antivascular drugs. RESULTS/CONCLUSION: Bevacizumab, a humanized monoclonal antibody against the vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), when added to cytotoxic chemotherapy, was the first treatment to prolong the overall survival of patients with advanced NSCLC beyond 12 months, a significant breakthrough in the management of advanced NSCLC. Small-molecule tyrosine kinase inhibitors and alternative antivascular strategies such as VEGF-trap and vascular disrupting agents are also being investigated and have shown promise in clinical trials. This review summarizes the most recent and important findings in antivascular agents in NSCLC.
-------------------------------------

10018335_234 - 0.750042973243 - science
[cell, memory, lymph, infection, node]

Long-term persistence and reactivation of T cell memory in the lung of mice infected with respiratory syncytial virus.
In mice acutely infected with respiratory syncytial virus (RSV), more than 20% of pulmonary CD8(+) T cells, but only 2-3% of CD8(+) T cells in the draining lymph node secreted interferon-gamma in response to a single peptide. Surprisingly, the percentage of virus-specific T cells in the lung remained at these high levels long after the acute infection. Pulmonary memory T cells were further studied in a sensitive adoptive transfer system, which allows visualizing polyclonal CD4(+) and CD8(+) virus-specific memory T cell responses. Fifty days after infection, persisting RSV-specific pulmonary T cells remained CD69(hi) CD62L(lo), but had returned to a resting memory state according to functional criteria. In the absence of neutralizing antibodies reinfection first induced cell division among virus-specific memory T cells 3 days after infection predominantly in the local lymph node. However, divided cells then rapidly accumulated in the lung without significantly increasing in the lymph node. These results suggest rapid export of reactivated cells from the lymph node to the target organ. Thus, although memory T cells can be maintained in the infected organ after a localized virus infection, amplification of a recall response appears to be most effective in organized lymphoid tissue.
-------------------------------------

10003665_234 - 0.914400651066 - medicine
[care, stroke, patient, rehabilitation]

Stroke care and rehabilitation.
This article explores the nurse's role in the care and rehabilitation of patients who have had a stroke. It relates to UKCC Professional Development categories: Care enhancement and Patient, family, client and colleague support.
-------------------------------------

10011496_234 - 0.849779950338 - science
[ctc1, coats, telomeric, dna, telomere, cell]

Mutations in CTC1, encoding conserved telomere maintenance component 1, cause Coats plus.
Coats plus is a highly pleiotropic disorder particularly affecting the eye, brain, bone and gastrointestinal tract. Here, we show that Coats plus results from mutations in CTC1, encoding conserved telomere maintenance component 1, a member of the mammalian homolog of the yeast heterotrimeric CST telomeric capping complex. Consistent with the observation of shortened telomeres in an Arabidopsis CTC1 mutant and the phenotypic overlap of Coats plus with the telomeric maintenance disorders comprising dyskeratosis congenita, we observed shortened telomeres in three individuals with Coats plus and an increase in spontaneous γH2AX-positive cells in cell lines derived from two affected individuals. CTC1 is also a subunit of the α-accessory factor (AAF) complex, stimulating the activity of DNA polymerase-α primase, the only enzyme known to initiate DNA replication in eukaryotic cells. Thus, CTC1 may have a function in DNA metabolism that is necessary for but not specific to telomeric integrity.
-------------------------------------

10005668_234 - 0.812478020277 - medicine
[tegaserod, study, symptom, bowel, treatment, ci, rr, ibs, gi]

Tegaserod for the treatment of irritable bowel syndrome.
BACKGROUND: IBS is a complex disorder that encompasses a wide profile of symptoms. Current drug treatments for irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) are of limited value. Many target specific symptoms only. Tegaserod, a 5HT(4) partial agonist, represents a novel mechanism of action in the treatment of IBS. OBJECTIVES: The objective of this review was to evaluate the efficacy and tolerability of tegaserod for the treatment of IBS in adults and adolescents aged 12 years and above. SEARCH STRATEGY: MEDLINE 1966-November 2002 and EMBASE 1980-November 2002 were searched. The text and key words used included "tegaserod", "HTF 919", "irritable bowel", and "colonic diseases, functional". The Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials, the Inflammatory Bowel Disease Review Group Specialized Trials Register, and Science Citation Index were also searched. Proceedings from the British Society of Gastroenterology Annual Meeting, and Digestive Disease Week (1998-2002) were hand searched. The manufacturer of tegaserod was contacted. Relevant articles were retrieved, and their reference lists were also reviewed. SELECTION CRITERIA: Randomised or quasi-randomised controlled trials comparing tegaserod with placebo, no treatment or any other intervention (pharmacological or non-pharmacological) in subjects aged 12 years and above with a diagnosis of IBS, focusing on clinical endpoints were considered for review. DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Study inclusion and exclusion, data extraction and quality assessment was undertaken by two reviewers independently. Meta-analysis was performed where study populations, designs, outcomes, and statistical reporting allowed combination of data in a valid way, using the summary statistic relative risk with 95% CI. Eight short-term placebo-controlled studies fulfilled our inclusion criteria. These were predominantly conducted in women. Seven studies evaluated the efficacy of tegaserod on global gastrointestinal (GI) symptoms in patients with constipation-predominant IBS (C-IBS). One small study evaluated safety in patients with diarrhoea-predominant IBS. MAIN RESULTS: The relative risk (RR) of being a responder in terms of global relief of GI symptoms was significantly higher with tegaserod 12 mg (RR 1.19, 95% CI 1.09, 1.29) and tegaserod 4 mg (RR 1.15, 95% CI 1.02, 1.31) compared with placebo, with a number needed to treat (NNT) of 14 and 20 respectively. When all tegaserod doses were combined and compared with placebo (n=4040), the RR of being a responder was 1.17 (95% CI 1.08, 1.27), with a NNT of 17. Although the pooled results indicate statistically significant benefit with tegaserod, the a priori minimal clinically important differences set in two of the four pooled studies were not reached. Tegaserod did not significantly improve the patients' individual symptoms of abdominal pain and discomfort although bowel habit showed a statistically significant improvement with tegaserod 4 mg and there was a non-significant trend in favour of tegaserod 12 mg. When GI symptoms were assessed separately, those indicative of GI motility such as number of bowel movements and days without bowel movements were generally improved with tegaserod although the proportion of patients experiencing diarrhoea was significantly higher in the tegaserod 12 mg group compared with placebo (RR 2.75, 95% CI 1.90, 3.97), with a number needed to harm (NNH) of 20. Effects of tegaserod on GI symptoms such as bloating, stool consistency, and straining were not consistent across the studies. REVIEWER'S CONCLUSIONS: Tegaserod appears to improve the overall symptomatology of IBS but there are currently few data on its effect on quality of life. In addition, more information is needed about its efficacy in men. It would also be of interest to know whether treatment with tegaserod leads either directly, or indirectly, to changes in visceral sensitivity or psychopathology, which are also considered important in the pathophysiology of this condition.
-------------------------------------

10003730_234 - 0.714395686326 - science
[pain, cwp, variant, genetic, association]

Genome-wide association study meta-analysis of chronic widespread pain: evidence for involvement of the 5p15.2 region.
BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Chronic widespread pain (CWP) is a common disorder affecting ∼10% of the general population and has an estimated heritability of 48-52%. In the first large-scale genome-wide association study (GWAS) meta-analysis, we aimed to identify common genetic variants associated with CWP. METHODS: We conducted a GWAS meta-analysis in 1308 female CWP cases and 5791 controls of European descent, and replicated the effects of the genetic variants with suggestive evidence for association in 1480 CWP cases and 7989 controls. Subsequently, we studied gene expression levels of the nearest genes in two chronic inflammatory pain mouse models, and examined 92 genetic variants previously described associated with pain. RESULTS: The minor C-allele of rs13361160 on chromosome 5p15.2, located upstream of chaperonin-containing-TCP1-complex-5 gene (CCT5) and downstream of FAM173B, was found to be associated with a 30% higher risk of CWP (minor allele frequency=43%; OR=1.30, 95% CI 1.19 to 1.42, p=1.2×10(-8)). Combined with the replication, we observed a slightly attenuated OR of 1.17 (95% CI 1.10 to 1.24, p=4.7×10(-7)) with moderate heterogeneity (I2=28.4%). However, in a sensitivity analysis that only allowed studies with joint-specific pain, the combined association was genome-wide significant (OR=1.23, 95% CI 1.14 to 1.32, p=3.4×10(-8), I2=0%). Expression levels of Cct5 and Fam173b in mice with inflammatory pain were higher in the lumbar spinal cord, not in the lumbar dorsal root ganglions, compared to mice without pain. None of the 92 genetic variants previously described were significantly associated with pain (p>7.7×10(-4)). CONCLUSIONS: We identified a common genetic variant on chromosome 5p15.2 associated with joint-specific CWP in humans. This work suggests that CCT5 and FAM173B are promising targets in the regulation of pain.
-------------------------------------

10013582_234 - 0.778792173369 - science
[test, result, anxiety, genetic, fap]

Predictive genetic testing: mediators and moderators of anxiety.
Mediators and moderators of anxiety following predictive genetic testing were investigated in a cross-sectional study of 208 individuals at risk for familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP). Receiving a positive test result was associated with increased anxiety. The relationship between test result and anxiety was mediated by how threatened individuals felt by their test results. The impact of a positive test result was greater for those who felt distressed about FAP in their families, perceived FAP to be more serious, and perceived the genetic test to be more accurate. The results suggest that assessing, and possibly modifying, people's appraisals of the condition and of its impact on the family and of the threat of the genetic test may help to reduce subsequent anxiety. This has implications for the practice of genetic counseling.
-------------------------------------

10006985_234 - 0.909819230816 - medicine
[response, amygdalum, patient, treatment, emotion, sad, depressed, face, specific, remission]

Increased amygdala responses to sad but not fearful faces in major depression: relation to mood state and pharmacological treatment.
OBJECTIVE: Increased amygdala response to negative emotions seen in functional MRI (fMRI) has been proposed as a biomarker for negative emotion processing bias underlying depressive symptoms and vulnerability to depressive relapse that are normalized by antidepressant drug treatment. The purpose of this study was to determine whether abnormal amygdala responses to face emotions in depression are related to specific emotions or change in response to antidepressant treatment and whether they are present as a stable trait in medication-free patients in remission. METHOD: Sixty-two medication-free unipolar depressed patients (38 were currently depressed, and 24 were in remission) and 54 healthy comparison subjects underwent an indirect face-emotion processing task during fMRI. Thirty-two currently depressed patients were treated with the antidepressant citalopram for 8 weeks. Adherence to treatment was evaluated by measuring citalopram plasma concentrations. RESULTS: Patients with current depression had increased bilateral amygdala responses specific to sad faces relative to healthy comparison subjects and nonmedicated patients in stable remission. Treatment with citalopram abolished the abnormal amygdala responses to sad faces in currently depressed patients but did not alter responses to fearful faces. CONCLUSIONS: Aberrant amygdala activation in response to sad facial emotions is specific to the depressed state and is a potential biomarker for a negative affective bias during a depressive episode.
-------------------------------------

10009685_234 - 0.751734171124 - science
[protein, case, trn1, fus, taf15, inclusion, body, trn2, ew, ftld-fus]

Nuclear Carrier and RNA Binding Proteins in Frontotemporal Lobar Degeneration associated with Fused in Sarcoma (FUS) pathological changes.
Aims:  We aimed to investigate the role of the nuclear carrier and binding proteins, transportin-1 (TRN1) and transportin-2 (TRN2), TATA-binding protein-associated factor 15 (TAF15) and Ewing's Sarcoma protein (EWS) in inclusion body formation in cases of Frontotemporal Lobar Degeneration (FTLD) associated with Fused in Sarcoma protein (FTLD-FUS). Methods:  Eight cases of FTLD-FUS (5 cases of atypical FTLD-U (aFTLD-U), 2 of Neuronal Intermediate Filament Inclusion Body Disease (NIFID) and 1 of Basophilic Inclusion Body Disease (BIBD)) were immunostained for FUS, TRN1, TRN2, TAF15 and EWS. 10 cases of FTLD associated with TDP-43 inclusions served as reference cases. Results:  The inclusion bodies in FTLD-FUS contained TRN1 and TAF15 and, to a lesser extent, EWS, but not TRN2. The patterns of immunostaining for TRN1 and TAF15 were very similar to that of FUS. None of these proteins was associated with tau or TDP-43 aggregations in FTLD. Conclusion:  Data suggest that FUS, TRN1 and TAF15 may participate in a functional pathway in an interdependent way, and imply that the function of TDP-43 may not necessarily be in parallel with, or complementary to, that of FUS, despite each protein sharing many similar structural elements. © 2012 The Authors. Neuropathology and Applied Neurobiology © 2012 British Neuropathological Society.
-------------------------------------

10012734_234 - 0.895710492718 - science
[hsd, oxidative, type, reductive, ??, enzyme, dehydrogenase]

Phytoestrogens inhibit human 17beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 5
The 17??-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 5 (17??-HSD 5) is involved in estrogen and androgen metabolism. In our study we tested the influence of environmental hormones, such as phytoestrogens (flavonoids, coumarins, coumestans), on reductive and oxidative 17??-HSD activity of the human 17??-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 5 (17??-HSD 5). These dietary substances were shown to be potent inhibitors of aromatase, different 17??-HSDs and seem to play an important role in delay of development of hormone dependent cancers. Our studies show that reductive and oxidative activity of the enzyme are inhibited by many dietary compounds, especially zearalenone, coumestrol, quercetin and biochanin A. Among the group of flavones inhibitor potency is growing with increasing number of hydroxylations. We suggest that these substances are bound to the hydrophilic cofactor-binding pocket of the enzyme. An interesting inhibition pattern is observed for 18??-glycyrrhetinic acid, which has no influence on the oxidative but only on the reductive reaction. This indicates that this substrate binds to pH- and cofactor-depending sites at the active center of the enzyme. Copyright ?? 2001 Elsevier Science Ireland Ltd.
-------------------------------------

10017388_234 - 0.761352633916 - science
[problem, flow, stochastic, field, property, pde, deterministic, random, large]

Robust Preconditioning for Second-Order Elliptic PDEs with Random Field Coefficients
Fluid flow and the transport of chemicals in flows in heterogeneous porous media are modelled mathematically using partial differential equations (PDEs). In deterministic modelling, material properties of the porous medium are assumed to be known explicitly. This assumption leads to tractable computations. To tackle the more realistic stochastic groundwater flow problem, it is necessary to represent the unknown permeability coefficients as random fields with prescribed statistical properties. Traditionally, large numbers of deterministic problems are solved in a Monte Carlo framework and the solutions averaged to obtain statistical properties of the solution variables. Alternatively, the so-called stochastic finite element method (SFEM) discretises the probabilistic dimension of the PDE directly. However, this approach has not gained popularity with practitioners due to a perceived high computational cost. In this report we solve the stochastic Darcy flow problem via traditional and stochastic finite element techniques, in primal and mixed formulation where appropriate. Permeability coefficients are represented using Gaussian or lognormal random fields. We focus on fast and efficient linear algebra techniques for solving both the large numbers of deterministic problems required by the Monte Carlo approach and, in contrast, the single, structured, but extremely large linear system that arises as a consequence of the SFEM. To achieve optimal computational complexity, black-box algebraic multigrid is exploited in the design of fast solvers.
-------------------------------------

10010327_234 - 0.889886895184 - science
[metabolic, different, microorganism, state]

Exploring the metabolic state of microorganisms using metabolomics
Microorganisms depend on their ability to modulate their metabolic composition according to specific circumstances, such as different phases of the growth cycle and circadian rhythms, fluctuations in environmental conditions, as well as experimental perturbations. A thorough understanding of these metabolic adaptations requires the ability to comprehensively identify and quantify the metabolome of bacterial cells in different states. In this review, we present an overview of the diverse metabolomics approaches recently adopted to explore the metabolism of a wide variety of microorganisms. Focusing on a selection of illustrative case studies, we assess the different experimental designs used and explore the major achievements and remaining challenges in the field. We conclude by discussing the important complementary information provided by computational methods such as genome-scale metabolic modeling, which enable an integrated analysis of metabolic state changes in the context of overall cellular physiology. ?? 2011 Future Science Ltd.
-------------------------------------

10018423_234 - 0.770937829134 - society
[citizenship, political, community, citizen-subjectivity, context, boundary]

'Birthright Citizenship and the ‘Mother-Child’ Subject: Reproducing the Nation/Reproducing the Self'
This paper considers critical responses to arguments regarding ‘anchor babies’ and ‘citizenship tourists’ in the context of ongoing changes to birthright citizenship legislation in recent years. This scholarship has emphasized the failure of such arguments to recognize the increasing permeable and fluid nature of national boundaries. The need to rethink the boundaries of political community in this context has been conceptualized predominantly through the question of therights which immigrant women and their children hold as individuals vis-à-vis the state. This paper, however, considers how citizen-subjectivity is not always exclusionable or inclusionable in political community as ‘individual’ woman or child in the last instance, as is presumed here. Rather, it explores how citizen-subjectivity often presents itself as a more ambiguous ‘motherchild’subject which is neither entirely one nor the other but “betwixt and between” (Shandy 2008). Drawing on the work of Julia Kristeva, this paper discusses how we can think through this fluidity of citizen-subjectivity in addition to the already highly emphasized fluidity of political community. It suggests that rethinking the boundaries of political subjectivity reconfigures our understanding of what citizenship (political community) can be in this context. For, although weare dealing with subjects who are citizens, they are citizens in a very different way to how this is normally conceptualized via commonality. Instead of being able to mark out and overcome exclusion, citizenship is defined here through processes of exclusion.
-------------------------------------

10008305_234 - 0.871783446003 - education
[technology, student, learning, use, teaching, cohort, course, experience, vle]

Digital or didactic: Using learning technology to confront the challenge of large cohort teaching
This paper investigates whether the selective use of technology can begin to overcome the challenge of large cohort teaching and deliver an enhanced student learning experience. It describes the initial development and evaluation of a campus-based management course taught to 270 third year engineering undergraduates at The University of Manchester. The course is structured around weekly keynote lectures, supplemented with extensive use of a virtual learning environment (VLE) and key Web 2.0 applications.The preliminary findings are that technology is not a panacea: face-to-face contact with teaching staff remains the priority for most students. Nevertheless, the VLE was found to improve the student learning experience provided that    •     Use of technology does not reduce face-to-face teaching time;    •     Teaching faculty acknowledges that students are, for the most part, highly strategic learners, engaging deeper with those technology tools that help them achieve their desired course outcomes;    •     Close attention is paid to learning design, aligning technology tools with the desired learning outcomes.Further work is now required to explore more effectively the use of the VLE and Web 2.0 as a vehicle for promoting collaborative learning. In addition, the authors will be redesigning course activities, both assessed and unassessed, to start to address the more lofty ambition of moving students from an acquisitive to a participative model of learning.Practitioner NotesWhat is already known about this topic    •     There is an ongoing debate about the effectiveness of learning technology in enhancing the student learning experience.    •     There are a number of published case studies describing and evaluating the effectiveness of VLEs in enhancing student learning across a range of disciplines, the majority of which involve small- to medium-sized cohorts.    •     Learning technology can be used to achieve more constructivist pedagogical principles.What this paper adds    •     A well-conducted case study of the use of learning technology to enhance large cohort teaching.    •     A critical review of the literature on the use of learning technology to enhance student learning.    •     An empirical contribution to the debate on whether learning technology can enhance the student learning experience.Implications for practice and/or policy    •     Technology is not a panacea to enable higher education institutions to do more with less.    •     Technology can enhance the student learning experience provided that it does not reduce face-to-face teaching time.    •     In utilising learning technology, close attention should be paid to learning design, aligning technology tools with the desired learning outcomes.
-------------------------------------

10014521_234 - 0.731681992096 - science
[level, composition, quantum, times, conduction, dot, influence, energy, piezoelectric, band]

Influence of composition on the piezoelectric effect and on the conduction band energy levels of InxGa1-xAs/GaAs quantum dots
Times Cited: 16
-------------------------------------

10008143_234 - 0.813843298297 - science
[hydrocortisone, hippocampal, bold, signal, hippocampus, infusion, function, depression, acute, task]

Detection of the acute effects of hydrocortisone in the hippocampus using pharmacological fMRI.
Impaired hippocampal function is believed to be important in the pathogenesis of depression. The hippocampus contains a high concentration of both mineralocorticoid (MR) and glucocorticoid receptors (GR), and the experimental administration of corticosteroids has been reported to mimic memory impairments seen in depression. Using pharmacological functional magnetic resonance imaging (phMRI) we investigated whether hippocampal function is altered after acute administration of hydrocortisone. Changes in BOLD signal following infusion of 100mg hydrocortisone given as a rapid intravenous bolus were measured in 14 healthy volunteers in a within-subject placebo-controlled crossover design. Subsequently, subjects completed an n-back task during an fMRI scan. Hydrocortisone infusion caused a significant, time-dependent increase in fMRI BOLD signal in hippocampus reaching a maximal effect at 11-19min. The n-back task increased BOLD signal in prefrontal and parietal cortical areas and decreased it in the hippocampus. After hydrocortisone the left hippocampal decrease in BOLD signal was attenuated with the magnitude of attenuation correlating with the increase seen after hydrocortisone infusion. No difference in behavioural task performance was observed. The results suggest acute hydrocortisone has rapid direct and modulatory influences on hippocampal function, probably acting through non-genomic GR or MR signalling. Hydrocortisone infusion phMRI may be a useful tool to investigate hippocampal corticosteroid receptor function in depression.
-------------------------------------

10009742_234 - 0.820893782489 - medicine
[patient, finding, chs, fungal, chronic, positive, sinus, sample, group, result]

Microbiology of chronic hyperplastic sinusitis.
BACKGROUND: Patients with chronic hyperplastic sinusitis (CHS) form a heterogeneous group with similar symptoms and similar treatment despite of possible different mechanisms behind the disease. In the present study we focused on the microbiological findings in CHS and compared these results to the patient history in order to find out a possible explanation for the aetiology and chronicity of CHS. METHODS: In 30 patients the sinus mucus was collected under endoscopic sinus surgery. Samples from 20 healthy volunteers were collected by nasal lavage. Eosinophil staining, bacterial culturing and fungal staining and culturing were done. Histological samples were obtained from all patients. RESULTS: Bacterial cultures were positive in 93% of the patients compared to 70% in controls. Staphylococcus aureus and coagulase-negative Staphylococci were the two most common findings in both groups. A total of seven patients had positive fungal finding. The only fungal genus found was Aspergillus. In the control group no samples were positive for fungi. CONCLUSIONS: Microbiological findings do not seem to explain the chronic course of CHS, but fungi may play some part in the pathophysiology of the disease. These results may be more a reflection of a change in the environment in the paranasal sinuses and a change in normal flora than the actual cause of CHS.
-------------------------------------

10007069_234 - 0.731860107631 - science
[skin, year, surface, microtopography, elastosis, adult, grade, dermal, older, odds]

Validation of skin surface microtopography as a measure of skin photoaging in a subtropical population aged 40 and over.
BACKGROUND: Evidence suggests that skin surface microtopography is a valid measure of photoaging among young adults, but whether this applies to older adults is unknown. METHODS: We investigated the association between degree of photoaging as measured by histological dermal elastosis and skin microtopography grades by decade of age from 40 to 89 years in a community sample in Australia. Skin surface replicas and punch biopsies were taken from 664 participants of the Nambour Skin Cancer Study. The association was assessed using ordinal logistic regression with proportional odds assumption, using histological dermal elastosis grades as outcome. RESULTS: There was significant increase in odds of higher skin surface microtopography grades with higher dermal elastosis grades for age groups below 70 years 40 to 49 years: odds ratio (OR) 2.96, 95% confidence interval (CI) 1.68-5.22; 50 to 59 years: OR 3.78, 95% CI 2.28-6.26; 60 to 69 years: OR 2.47, 95% CI 1.41-4.35). The association was not significant for those 70 years or older. CONCLUSION: Skin surface microtopography grading system is a valid measure of degree of dermal elastosis for middle-aged and older adults up to 69 years but appears not to be valid for adults 70 years or more living in a high sun exposure setting.
-------------------------------------

10009710_234 - 0.714289228942 - science
[gene, expression, cdr2, cdr1, chronic, apeced, candida, aps-i, albican, adh1]

ADH1 expression inversely correlates with CDR1 and CDR2 in Candida albicans from chronic oral candidosis in APECED (APS-I) patients.
Expression of the alcohol dehydrogenase gene ADH1, which converts ethanol into carcinogenic acetaldehyde, significantly inversely correlated with the expression of CDR1 and CDR2, genes linked to azole resistance in Candida albicans isolated from chronic oral candidosis in autoimmune polyendocrinopathy-candidosis-ectodermal dystrophy (APECED, APS-I) patients. This is a novel link between candidal two-carbon metabolism genes and azole resistance.
-------------------------------------

10017131_234 - 0.756758922265 - science
[swarf, laser, layer, corrosion, deposition, work, machining, investigation, steel, wall]

An investigation into laser deposition of machining chips and characteristics of the final clad
Laser metal deposition is an additive manufacturing technique to build fully dense structures with a strong metallurgical bonding with the underlying material.  Spherical gas-atomised metal powders are principally used as build material which is a costly option and restricts its application on a wide scale. On the other hand, nonspherical particles produced by machining are much cheaper to produce and readily available as waste swarf which should be recycled. The use of machined particles as a viable form of build material for laser direct metal deposition has not been explored previously and is the subject of the investigations reported in this thesis.   In the first work, samples of carbon steel machining swarf in three size ranges were laser deposited to build thin walls. The produced walls exhibited fine martensitic microstructure with minimal porosity. As general trends, individual deposition tracks were found to be lower, and wider with an increase of particle size. 50% reduction in hardness was observed when using coarser particle size. This work was extended so as to build U-shaped structures with variable laser power in contrast to the previous work which was done with one set of processing parameter values. The microstructure observed was similar to that of the previous work. However, hardness has found to increase with decrease in laser power. After successful deposition and encouraging results from the process, machining swarf of Inconel 617 was used to produce corrosion resistant layers on a mild steel substrate. A Design of Experiment methodology was used to analyse the relationship between the processing parameters and the coated layer characteristics. The layer thickness and hardness were found to increase with the mass feed rate whilst an increase in laser power produced the opposite result. All layers had a predominantly dendritic microstructure and displayed remarkably higher corrosion resistance than the mild steel sample. The work was expanded to investigate the surface characteristics and corrosion resistance in a harsh corrosive environment, using different pH brine solutions. In this investigation, four layers were produced with two laser power and mass feed rate values. Accounting for all measurements, Inconel 617 swarf built layers provided very good corrosion protection and confirmed the viability of using this method as a low-cost corrosion protection for both mild and harsh environments. Since the investigations authored above were confined to swarf alone, the final chapter examines the comparison of stainless steel 316L thin wall structures produced with swarf and gas-atomised powder using similar processing conditions. The build materials performed similarly, but walls made from swarf were slightly shorter with a coarser microstructure and had poorer corrosion resistance than the powder equivalents.The results of these investigations confirm the feasibility of machining swarf as an alternative viable option. However, further research will help to explore its full potential.
-------------------------------------

10008860_234 - 0.96441359993 - science
[adsorption, calcite, surface, different, uranyl, energy, free]

Atomistic Simulations of Calcium Uranyl(VI) Carbonate Adsorption on Calcite and Stepped-Calcite Surfaces
Adsorption of actinyl ions onto mineral surfaces is one of the main mechanisms that control the migration of these ions in environmental systems. Here, we present computational classical molecular dynamics (MD) simulations to investigate the behavior of U(VI) in contact with different calcite surfaces. The calcium-uranyl-carbonate Ca2UO2(CO3)3 species is shown to display both inner- and outer-sphere adsorption to the flat {101?4} and the stepped {314?8} and {31?2?16} planes of calcite. Free energy calculations, using the umbrella sampling method, are employed to simulate adsorption paths of the same uranyl species on the different calcite surfaces under aqueous condition. Outer-sphere adsorption is found to dominate over inner-sphere adsorption because of the high free energy barrier of removing a uranyl?carbonate interaction and replacing it with a new uranyl?surface interaction. An important binding mode is proposed involving a single vicinal water monolayer between the surface and the sorbed complex. From the free energy profiles of the different calcite surfaces, the uranyl complex was also found to adsorb preferentially on the acute-stepped {314?8} face of calcite, in agreement with experiment.
-------------------------------------

10009370_234 - 0.838890746539 - science
[acetaldehyde, candida, oral, carcinogenic, mm, albican, incubation, ethanol, production, isolate]

Production of carcinogenic acetaldehyde by Candida albicans from patients with potentially malignant oral mucosal disorders.
OBJECTIVES: Production of carcinogenic acetaldehyde by Candida has been suggested to contribute to epithelial dysplasia and oral carcinogenesis. Oral lichen planus (OLP), oral lichenoid lesion (OLL) and oral leukoplakia (OL) are potentially carcinogenic oral diseases where colonisation by Candida is common, but acetaldehyde production by Candida has not been studied. STUDY DESIGN: Acetaldehyde production in ethanol (11 mM), glucose (100 mM), ethanol-glucose (11 mM and 100 mM) or red wine (1200 mM ethanol) incubation by Candida albicans from patients with OLL (n = 6), OLP (n = 16), OL (n = 6) and controls (n = 6) was measured by gas chromatography. Participants completed a questionnaire regarding their smoking habits and alcohol consumption. RESULTS: All Candida albicans isolates produced potentially carcinogenic levels of acetaldehyde (>100 μM) in all incubations containing ethanol. The control group isolates produced the highest acetaldehyde levels. Isolates from smokers produced more acetaldehyde in all incubations than those from non-smokers. The difference was significant in ethanol-glucose incubation. Isolates from patients who were both smokers and drinkers produced the highest amounts when incubated in ethanol, ethanol-glucose and wine. CONCLUSIONS: Candida albicans isolated from potentially carcinogenic oral diseases can produce mutagenic amounts of acetaldehyde. Cigarette smoking and alcohol consumption may favour adaptational changes resulting in the upregulation of candidal acetaldehyde metabolism.
-------------------------------------

10008603_234 - 0.915977777192 - science
[skin, chemical, receptor, sensitization, danger, necessary]

Danger, intracellular signaling, and the orchestration of dendritic cell function in skin sensitization.
Allergic contact dermatitis is an important occupational and environmental disease caused by topical exposure to chemical allergens. An area of considerable interest and, in the context of hazard identification and characterization, an area of great importance is developing an understanding of the characteristics that confer on chemicals the ability to cause skin sensitization. For the successful acquisition of skin sensitization, it is necessary that a chemical must gain access to the viable epidermis, form stable immunogenic associations with host proteins, and provide the necessary stimuli for the activation, mobilization, and maturation of skin dendritic cells (DC). It is the last of these properties that is the subject of this article. The purpose here is to review the mechanisms through which skin sensitizers provide the triggers necessary for engagement of cutaneous DC. Of particular interest are the nature and function of danger signals elicited by skin sensitizing chemicals. Among the pathways considered here are those involving Toll-like receptors, C-type lectin receptors, neuropeptide receptors, prostanoid receptors, and the inflammasome. Collectively, danger signals in the skin provide a bridge between the innate and adaptive immune systems and are of pivotal importance for the initiation of cutaneous immune responses, including those to chemical allergens that result in skin sensitization.
-------------------------------------

10011367_234 - 0.736270752286 - science
[heat]

Novel MILP-based iterative method for the retrofit of heat exchanger networks with intensified heat transfer
<ce:title>European Symposium of Computer Aided Process Engineering - 21</ce:title>
-------------------------------------

10005524_234 - 0.710893494367 - food_and_drink
[ad, transgenic, diet, htrp, intraneuronal, animal, disease, ca1, density, ntrp]

High tryptophan diet reduces CA1 intraneuronal β-amyloid in the triple transgenic mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a progressive neurodegenerative disease that impairs mnesic functions. The histopathology of the disease is manifested by the accumulation of intracellular β-amyloid (Aβ) and subsequent formation of neuritic plaques as well as the presence neurofibrillary tangles in specific brain regions associated with learning and memory including the hippocampus. Here, we analysed the effect of chronic (1 month) food diets containing low (LTrP), normal (NTrP) and high tryptophan (HTrP), 0.04, 0.20 and 0.40 g/100 g, respectively, on CA1 serotonin transporter (SERT) fibre density, intraneuronal Aβ deposition and total number of serotonergic (5-HT) neurons in an AD triple transgenic (3xTg-AD) mouse model. Nontransgenic (non-Tg) animals fed with HTrP displayed increased SERT fibre density in CA1 (35%) and in stratum lacunosum moleculare (S.Mol) (48%) compared to LTrP diet. Transgenic animals showed increased SERT fibre density in CA1 S.Mol compared to diet-matched non-Tg irrespective of dietary tryptophan content (104% for LTrP, 74% for NTrP and 35% for HTrP); no differences were observed in the total number of 5-HT neurons neither in the dorsal nor in the median raphe nuclei. However, and more relevant to AD, HTrP diet reduced intraneuronal Aβ density (by a 17%) in transgenic animals compared to transgenic animals fed with NTrP diet. Our results show that increased dietary TrP intake reduces intraneuronal Aβ load in the 3xTg-AD mouse model of AD, suggesting that enhanced TrP intake and in consequence a potential increase in 5-HT neurotransmission may be effective in reducing plaque pathology in AD.
-------------------------------------

10005638_234 - 0.785200594936 - medicine
[hypnotherapy, patient, life, quality, bowel, control, irritable, syndrome, work, symptom]

Symptomatology, quality of life and economic features of irritable bowel syndrome--the effect of hypnotherapy.
AIMS: The purposes of this study were to quantify the effects of severe irritable bowel syndrome on quality of life and economic functioning, and to assess the impact of hypnotherapy on these features. METHODS: A validated quality of life questionnaire including questions on symptoms, employment and health seeking behaviour was administered to 25 patients treated with hypnotherapy (aged 25-55 years; four male) and to 25 control irritable bowel syndrome patients of comparable severity (aged 21-58 years; two male). Visual analogue scales were used and scores derived to assess the patients' symptoms and satisfaction with each aspect of life. RESULTS: Patients treated with hypnotherapy reported less severe abdominal pain (P < 0.0001), bloating (P < 0.02), bowel habit (P < 0.0001), nausea (P < 0.05), flatulence (P < 0.05), urinary symptoms (P < 0.01), lethargy (P < 0.01), backache (P = 0.05) and dyspareunia (P = 0.05) compared with control patients. Quality of life, such as psychic well being (P < 0.0001), mood (P < 0.001), locus of control (P < 0.05), physical well being (P < 0.001) and work attitude (P < 0.001) were also favourably influenced by hypnotherapy. For those patients in employment, more of the controls were likely to take time off work (79% vs. 32%; p = 0.02) and visit their general practitioner ( 58% vs. 21%; P = 0.056) than those treated with hypnotherapy. Three of four hypnotherapy patients out of work prior to treatment resumed employment compared with none of the six in the control group. CONCLUSION: This study has shown that in addition to relieving the symptoms of irritable bowel syndrome, hypnotherapy profoundly improves the patients' quality of life and reduces absenteeism from work. It therefore appears that, despite being relatively expensive to provide, it could well be a good long-term investment.
-------------------------------------

10011032_234 - 0.843541286041 - science
[alpha, tnf, oscillation, stimulation, nf-kappa, sustained, response, model, intensity, value]

A systematic survey of the response of a model NF-kappa B signalling pathway to TNF alpha stimulation
White's lab established that strong, continuous stimulation with tumour necrosis factor-alpha (TNF alpha) can induce sustained oscillations in the subcellular localisation of the transcription factor nuclear factor kappa B (NF-kappa B). But the intensity of the TNF alpha signal varies substantially, from picomolar in the blood plasma of healthy organisms to nanomolar in diseased states. We report on a systematic survey using computational bifurcation theory to explore the relationship between the intensity of TNF alpha stimulation and the existence of sustained NF-kappa B oscillations. Using a deterministic model developed by Ashall et al. in 2009, we find that the system's responses to TNF alpha are characterised by a supercritical Hopf bifurcation point: above a critical intensity of TNF alpha the system exhibits sustained oscillations in NF-kappa B localisation. For TNF alpha below this critical value, damped oscillations are observed. This picture depends, however, on the values of the model's other parameters. When the values of certain reaction rates are altered the response of the signalling pathway to TNFa stimulation changes: in addition to the sustained oscillations induced by high-dose stimulation, a second oscillatory regime appears at much lower doses. Finally, we define scores to quantify the sensitivity of the dynamics of the system to variation in its parameters and use these scores to establish that the qualitative dynamics are most sensitive to the details of NF-kappa B mediated gene transcription. (C) 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
-------------------------------------

10004883_234 - 0.711252093799 - medicine
[neurological, symptom, field, millennium, interest, meeting, functional, research]

Functional (conversion) neurological symptoms: new research since the millennium
Functional neurological symptoms (FNS) are commonly encountered but have engendered remarkably little academic interest. ‘UK-Functional Neurological Symptoms (UK-FNS)’ was an informal inaugural meeting of UK based clinicians in March 2011 with a variety of research and clinical interests in the field. This narrative review reflects the content of the meeting, and our opinion of key findings in the field since the turn of the millennium.
-------------------------------------

10007522_234 - 0.948274370271 - medicine
[chemotherapy, patient, treatment, month, platinum-based, time, rr, sclc, survival, median]

Outcomes of small-cell lung cancer patients treated with second-line chemotherapy: a multi-institutional retrospective analysis.
BACKGROUND: Patients with small-cell lung cancer (SCLC) that progress after first-line chemotherapy have a poor prognosis and the evidence of a benefit from second-line (SL) chemotherapy is limited. Patients relapsing or progressing more than 90 days after completion of first-line treatment are considered platinum sensitive and may be rechallenged with platinum-based chemotherapy. Topotecan is approved as SL treatment independent of time to progression. This retrospective analysis evaluates the clinical outcomes of SCLC patients who received SL chemotherapy after platinum-etoposide chemotherapy. PATIENTS AND METHODS: We retrospectively reviewed 161 patients who received SL chemotherapy for SCLC. Patients were divided into four subgroups by type of SL treatment: (1) platinum-based rechallenge; (2) anthracycline-based regimens; (3) topotecan; (4) other single agents. The endpoints were overall survival (OS), progression-free survival (PFS) and response rate (RR). Survival curves were plotted using the Kaplan-Meier method. The Cox proportional hazard model was used for multivariate analysis to investigate factors influencing survival. RESULTS: The median age was 63. There were 125 males and 36 females. Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group performance status (ECOG-PS) was 0, 1 and 2 in 12.5%, 62.5% and 25% of patients, respectively. Platinum sensitive/platinum resistant/platinum refractory/unknown=121/29/3/8 patients. Median time to SL chemotherapy was 6.9 months. The median PFS from starting second-line treatment was 4.3 months and median OS was 5.8 months. The overall RR was 22.9%. There was a trend toward higher RR (34.5% vs 17.5%, p for trend: 0.06) and OS (9.2 months vs 5.8 months, p=0.08) for patients with sensitive disease who were rechallenged with platinum-based chemotherapy. A multivariate analysis that adjusted for the time to SL treatment showed that a platinum-containing regimen achieves better RR, PFS and OS independently of the time to SL chemotherapy and that response to first-line treatment and PS at SL are the only independent prognostic factors. CONCLUSIONS: The outcome for second-line therapy for SCLC was poor and benefit appeared to be limited to those patients with good PS and rechallenged with platinum-based chemotherapy. Platinum-based rechallenge should be considered as a standard comparator in future randomized controlled trials of SL chemotherapy.
-------------------------------------

10008001_234 - 0.852050929194 - science
[dot, strain, composition, simulation, relaxation, nonuniform, cited, times, quantum, atomistic]

Atomistic simulation of strain relaxation in InxGa1-xAs/GaAs quantum dots with nonuniform composition
Times Cited: 64
-------------------------------------

10003964_234 - 0.767840759651 - medicine
[trainee, patient, registrar, practice, general, gp]

In general practice “registrars” are more likely to be perceived as qualified than are “trainees”
Following a change in the terminology referring to those undertaking post-registration training in general practice, this simple patient survey was undertaken to determine whether patients understood the terms GP registrar and GP trainee.
-------------------------------------

10005623_234 - 0.720537788648 - medicine
[bowel, irritable, syndrome, non-colonic, rr, feature, disease, symptom, risk]

More accurate diagnosis of irritable bowel syndrome by the use of 'non-colonic' symptomatology.
The criteria now used in an attempt to distinguish irritable bowel syndrome from organic gastrointestinal disease rely almost entirely on symptoms of colonic origin. 'Non-colonic' symptoms, however, arising either from elsewhere in the gut or of a more general nature, are common in irritable bowel syndrome and may have even better diagnostic potential. The prevalence of these non-colonic features was assessed in 107 patients with the irritable bowel syndrome and 295 subjects with other gut disorders. Gastrointestinal type non-colonic symptoms are useful in differentiating irritable bowel syndrome from inflammatory bowel disease but, with the exception of early satiety, are not helpful when there is gastro-oesophageal or biliary disease. More general 'non-colonic' features, such as lethargy and backache, are much commoner in irritable bowel syndrome than in all the organic gastrointestinal diseases studied and have good discriminant function. Multiple logistic regression analysis identified certain features that had a particularly significant independent risk for irritable bowel syndrome. Those were lethargy (relative risk 6.7), incomplete evacuation (RR 5.2), age under 40 (RR 2.1), backache (RR 2.0), early satiety (RR 1.8), and frequency of micturition (RR 1.8). These relative risks can be multiplied together to give an overall risk when more than one of these features is present in a patient. Until a diagnostic test is available more confident diagnosis of irritable bowel syndrome can be achieved by identifying symptoms that have good discriminant function. The results of this study indicate that the non-colonic features of irritable bowel syndrome may be especially valuable in this respect.
-------------------------------------

10007666_234 - 0.945954266796 - science
[thermodynamics, hydrothermal, study, gyrolite, mechanism, reaction, kinetics, crystallization]

In-situ synchrotron study of the kinetics, thermodynamics, and reaction mechanisms of the hydrothermal crystallization of gyrolite,
cited By (since 1996) 30
-------------------------------------

100011_102 - 0.707744367455 - food_and_drink
[colour, package, fruit, design, product]

Colour Design for Carton-Packed Fruit Juice Packages
<p>The present research studies the relationships between observers’ expectations for 7 fruit juice packages and the colour design of the package. To do this, a two-stage experiment was conducted. At the first stage, we studied perceived colours for the fruit images shown on each package. At the second stage, fruit juice packages with 20 package colours were rated using 5 bipolar scales: colour harmony, preference, freshness, naturalness and product quality. The experimental results show that the observers tended to perceive fruit image colours lighter and more saturated than those measured using colour measuring instruments. Using factor analyses, we classified the 5 bipolar scales into 2 factors: Product Preference and Freshness. Package colour design was found to have significant impacts on both factors: similarity in chroma and hue between package colour and perceived fruit colour would lead to high product expectations.
</p>
<p>
<strong>Keywords:</strong> <br />
colour design; colour harmony; product expectation; perceived image colour</p>
-------------------------------------

10018365_234 - 0.750042973243 - science
[cell, memory, lymph, infection, node]

Long-term persistence and reactivation of T cell memory in the lung of mice infected with respiratory syncytial virus.
In mice acutely infected with respiratory syncytial virus (RSV), more than 20% of pulmonary CD8(+) T cells, but only 2-3% of CD8(+) T cells in the draining lymph node secreted interferon-gamma in response to a single peptide. Surprisingly, the percentage of virus-specific T cells in the lung remained at these high levels long after the acute infection. Pulmonary memory T cells were further studied in a sensitive adoptive transfer system, which allows visualizing polyclonal CD4(+) and CD8(+) virus-specific memory T cell responses. Fifty days after infection, persisting RSV-specific pulmonary T cells remained CD69(hi) CD62L(lo), but had returned to a resting memory state according to functional criteria. In the absence of neutralizing antibodies reinfection first induced cell division among virus-specific memory T cells 3 days after infection predominantly in the local lymph node. However, divided cells then rapidly accumulated in the lung without significantly increasing in the lymph node. These results suggest rapid export of reactivated cells from the lymph node to the target organ. Thus, although memory T cells can be maintained in the infected organ after a localized virus infection, amplification of a recall response appears to be most effective in organized lymphoid tissue.
-------------------------------------

10015085_234 - 0.864768364197 - medicine
[syndrome, patient, hypothesis, deficiency, misregulation, zellweger, metabolism, peroxisome, gaba, binding]

Pathogenesis of peroxisomal deficiency disorders (Zellweger syndrome) may be mediated by misregulation of the GABAergic system via the diazepam binding inhibitor
Background: Zellweger syndrome (ZS) is a fatal inherited disease caused by peroxisome biogenesis deficiency. Patients are characterized by multiple disturbances of lipid metabolism, profound hypotonia and neonatal seizures, and distinct craniofacial malformations. Median live expectancy of ZS patients is less than one year. While the molecular basis of peroxisome biogenesis and metabolism is known in considerable detail, it is unclear how peroxisome deficiency leads to the most severe neurological symptoms. Recent analysis of ZS mouse models has all but invalidated previous hypotheses. Hypothesis: We suggest that a regulatory rather than a metabolic defect is responsible for the drastic impairment of brain function in ZS patients. Testing the hypothesis: Using microarray analysis we identify diazepam binding inhibitor/acyl-CoA binding protein (DBI) as a candidate protein that might be involved in the pathogenic mechanism of ZS. DBI has a dual role as a neuropeptide antagonist of GABA(A) receptor signaling in the brain and as a regulator of lipid metabolism. Repression of DBI in ZS patients could result in an overactivation of GABAergic signaling, thus eventually leading to the characteristic hypotonia and seizures. The most important argument for a misregulation of GABA(A) in ZS is, however, provided by the striking similarity between ZS and "benzodiazepine embryofetopathy", a malformation syndrome observed after the abuse of GABA(A) agonists during pregnancy. Implications of the hypothesis: We present a tentative mechanistic model of the effect of DBI misregulation on neuronal function that could explain some of the aspects of the pathology of Zellweger syndrome. ?? 2004 Breitling; licensee BioMed Central Ltd.
-------------------------------------

10006960_234 - 0.802893337567 - science
[model, tissue, mutation, ventricular, n588k, re-entrant, transmural, wave]

Increased vulnerability of human ventricle to re-entrant excitation in hERG-linked variant 1 short QT syndrome.
The short QT syndrome (SQTS) is a genetically heterogeneous condition characterized by abbreviated QT intervals and an increased susceptibility to arrhythmia and sudden death. This simulation study identifies arrhythmogenic mechanisms in the rapid-delayed rectifier K(+) current (I(Kr))-linked SQT1 variant of the SQTS. Markov chain (MC) models were found to be superior to Hodgkin-Huxley (HH) models in reproducing experimental data regarding effects of the N588K mutation on KCNH2-encoded hERG. These ionic channel models were then incorporated into human ventricular action potential (AP) models and into 1D and 2D idealised and realistic transmural ventricular tissue simulations and into a 3D anatomical model. In single cell models, the N588K mutation abbreviated ventricular cell AP duration at 90% repolarization (APD(90)) and decreased the maximal transmural voltage heterogeneity (δV) during APs. This resulted in decreased transmural heterogeneity of APD(90) and of the effective refractory period (ERP): effects that are anticipated to be anti-arrhythmic rather than pro-arrhythmic. However, with consideration of transmural heterogeneity of I(Kr) density in the intact tissue model based on the ten Tusscher-Noble-Noble-Panfilov ventricular model, not only did the N588K mutation lead to QT-shortening and increases in T-wave amplitude, but δV was found to be augmented in some local regions of ventricle tissue, resulting in increased tissue vulnerability for uni-directional conduction block and predisposing to formation of re-entrant excitation waves. In 2D and 3D tissue models, the N588K mutation facilitated and maintained re-entrant excitation waves due to the reduced substrate size necessary for sustaining re-entry. Thus, in SQT1 the N588K-hERG mutation facilitates initiation and maintenance of ventricular re-entry, increasing the lifespan of re-entrant spiral waves and the stability of scroll waves in 3D tissue.
-------------------------------------

10009854_234 - 0.885820695527 - science
[aerosol, tropospheric, characterization, times, switzerland, alpine, site, carbon, black, cited]

Single particle characterization of black carbon aerosols at a tropospheric alpine site in Switzerland
Times Cited: 0
-------------------------------------

10018108_234 - 0.783047303704 - science
[tissue, d172n, re-entry, model, kir2, re-entrant, vulnerability, excitation, ventricular, mutant]

Proarrhythmia in KCNJ2-linked short QT syndrome: insights from modelling.
AIMS: One form of the short QT syndrome (SQT3) has been linked to the D172N gain-in-function mutation to Kir2.1, which preferentially increases outward current through channels responsible for inward rectifier K(+) current (I(K1)). This study investigated mechanisms by which the Kir2.1 D172N mutation facilitates and perpetuates ventricular arrhythmias. METHODS AND RESULTS: The ten Tusscher et al. model for human ventricular action potentials (APs) was modified to incorporate changes to I(K1) based on experimentally observed changes to Kir2.1 function: both heterozygous (WT-D172N) and homozygous (D172N) mutant scenarios were studied. Cell models were incorporated into heterogeneous one-dimensional (1D), 2D tissue, and 3D models to compute the restitution curves of AP duration (APD-R), effective refractory period (ERP-R), and conduction velocity (CV). Temporal and spatial vulnerability of ventricular tissue to re-entry was measured and dynamic behaviour of re-entrant excitation waves (lifespan and dominant frequency) in 2D and 3D models of the human ventricle was characterized. D172N 'mutant' I(K1) led to abbreviated APD and ERP, as well as steeper APD-R and ERP-R curves. It reduced tissue excitability at low excitation rates but increased it at high rates. It increased tissue temporal vulnerability for initiating re-entry, but reduced the minimal substrate size necessary to sustain re-entry. SQT3 'mutant' I(K1) also stabilized and accelerated re-entrant excitation waves, leading to sustained rapid re-entry. CONCLUSION: Increased I(K1) due to the Kir2.1 D172N mutation increases arrhythmia risk due to increased tissue vulnerability, shortened ERP, and altered excitability, which in combination facilitate initiation and maintenance of re-entrant circuits.
-------------------------------------

10008048_234 - 0.837454757261 - science
[variant, nafld, hepatic, steatosis, association, trait, ct, genome-wide, heart, genetic]

Genome-wide association analysis identifies variants associated with nonalcoholic fatty liver disease that have distinct effects on metabolic traits.
Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) clusters in families, but the only known common genetic variants influencing risk are near PNPLA3. We sought to identify additional genetic variants influencing NAFLD using genome-wide association (GWA) analysis of computed tomography (CT) measured hepatic steatosis, a non-invasive measure of NAFLD, in large population based samples. Using variance components methods, we show that CT hepatic steatosis is heritable (∼26%-27%) in family-based Amish, Family Heart, and Framingham Heart Studies (n = 880 to 3,070). By carrying out a fixed-effects meta-analysis of genome-wide association (GWA) results between CT hepatic steatosis and ∼2.4 million imputed or genotyped SNPs in 7,176 individuals from the Old Order Amish, Age, Gene/Environment Susceptibility-Reykjavik study (AGES), Family Heart, and Framingham Heart Studies, we identify variants associated at genome-wide significant levels (p<5×10(-8)) in or near PNPLA3, NCAN, and PPP1R3B. We genotype these and 42 other top CT hepatic steatosis-associated SNPs in 592 subjects with biopsy-proven NAFLD from the NASH Clinical Research Network (NASH CRN). In comparisons with 1,405 healthy controls from the Myocardial Genetics Consortium (MIGen), we observe significant associations with histologic NAFLD at variants in or near NCAN, GCKR, LYPLAL1, and PNPLA3, but not PPP1R3B. Variants at these five loci exhibit distinct patterns of association with serum lipids, as well as glycemic and anthropometric traits. We identify common genetic variants influencing CT-assessed steatosis and risk of NAFLD. Hepatic steatosis associated variants are not uniformly associated with NASH/fibrosis or result in abnormalities in serum lipids or glycemic and anthropometric traits, suggesting genetic heterogeneity in the pathways influencing these traits.
-------------------------------------

10001961_234 - 0.702948052405 - science
[movement, electrode, boundary, eit]

Accounting for electrode movement in MRI-informed functional EIT lung imaging
It is known to the thoracic EIT community that inaccurately known boundary shape and electrode positions can potentially cause major artefacts in reconstructions. These problems are addressed in this work by using an MR (Magnetic Resonance) image to approximate the boundary shape, and a forward problem perturbation technique to calculate an electrode movement Jacobian. Using real thorax EIT data from the fEITER system, two reconstruction algorithms, one accounting for movement and the other not, are compared. The corrections demonstrate that better spatial resolution and contrast of the lungs is obtained when accounting for electrode movement, as well as a reduction in boundary artefacts.
-------------------------------------

10004898_234 - 0.707749377504 - medicine
[guideline, antipsychotic, treatment, atypical, schizophrenia, drug, patient]

Guidelines for antipsychotic drug treatment of schizophrenia.
Rationale: The SiGMA algorithm and corresponding guidelines for the antipsychotic treatment of schizophrenia and related disorders were developed out of the finding that across the twelve provider units of Greater Manchester, the use of, and expenditure on, clozapine and the other new atypical antipsychotic drugs varied greatly. There were no locally agreed standards or guidelines in place for the prescription of such drugs. Individual Trusts varied in whether they had current guidelines for the prescription of antipsychotic medication, the content of such guidelines, and the extent to which the guidelines were being followed by clinicians.The SiGMA guidelines have been adapted by the Manchester Mental Health and Social Care Trust Medicines Management Committee taking into account the NICE Guidelines ‘Guidance on the use of newer (atypical) antipsychotic drugs for the treatment of schizophrenia’.Scope: The guidelines and accompanying algorithm offer a first-line choice of atypical or conventional antipsychotic treatment to be made in consultation with the patient, although the preferred treatment of choice would be an atypical antipsychotic. The algorithm avoids unnecessary delays in proceeding to clozapine, if appropriate and recognises evidence for psychological therapies in improving the outcome for patients with schizophrenia.Patient group: Primarily patients aged between 16-64 years with schizophrenia or related functional disorders. For patients with these conditions who are elderly, lower doses than in younger adults should be considered and particular attention paid to side-effects.
-------------------------------------

10009039_234 - 0.913124694878 - science
[protein, arsenite, aggregate, folding]

Arsenite interferes with protein folding and triggers formation of protein aggregates in yeast.
Several metals and metalloids profoundly affect biological systems, but their impact on the proteome and mechanisms of toxicity are not fully understood. Here, we demonstrate that arsenite causes protein aggregation in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Various molecular chaperones were found to be associated with arsenite-induced aggregates indicating that this metalloid promotes protein misfolding. Using in vivo and in vitro assays, we show that proteins in the process of synthesis/folding are particularly sensitive to arsenite-induced aggregation, that arsenite interferes with protein folding by acting on unfolded polypeptides, and that arsenite directly inhibits chaperone activity. Thus, folding inhibition contributes to arsenite toxicity in two ways: by aggregate formation and by chaperone inhibition. Importantly, arsenite-induced protein aggregates can act as seeds committing other, labile proteins to misfold and aggregate. Our findings describe a novel mechanism of toxicity that may explain the suggested role of this metalloid in the etiology and pathogenesis of protein folding disorders associated with arsenic poisoning.
-------------------------------------

10017088_234 - 0.841373939502 - science
[tissue, enzyme, amine, lox, activity, oxidase]

Cross-linking of structural proteins in ageing skin: an in situ assay for the detection of amine oxidase activity.
With increasing age, dynamic tissues such as lungs, blood vessels and skin lose their ability to both deform and recoil, culminating in tissue stiffening. This loss of tissue elasticity, which profoundly impacts tissue function and thus morbidity, may be due not only to changes in the relative abundance of key extracellular matrix proteins within tissues but also to their accumulation of post-translational modifications. Whilst to date attention has focussed primarily on the age-related non-enzymatic formation of advanced glycation end products, the accumulation of pathological enzyme-mediated cross-links may also lead to age-related tissue stiffening. The lysyl oxidase (LOX) family of enzymes are constitutively expressed in adult tissues and are known to drive the catalysis of cross-links in both fibrillar collagens and elastin. Although immunochemical approaches are commonly used to localise the inactive pro-enzyme of LOX, and biochemical methods are employed to quantify activity in homogenised tissue, they do not allow for the in situ localisation of the enzyme. Thus, we have developed a novel assay to both detect and localise LOX enzyme activity in situ. LOX family members are amine oxidases and this assay uses the principle that an amine substrate in the presence of this class of enzyme will be oxidised to an aldehyde and hydrogen peroxide (H2O2). In turn, H2O2, when combined with luminol and horseradish peroxidase, will produce a light-emitting reaction that can be detected by film autoradiography. The development of a technique to localise specific amine oxidase activity in tissue sections may provide crucial additional information on the exact role played by this class of enzymes in mediating age-related tissue stiffening.
-------------------------------------

10008578_234 - 0.711916905995 - technology_and_computing
[controller, signal, power]

Damping of inter-area oscillations in mixed AC/DC networks using WAMS based supplementary controller
The paper presents a supplementary VSC-HVDC Power Oscillation Damping (POD) controller based on wide area measurement signals (WAMS). The controller is designed as Multi Input Single Output (MISO) using a Modal Linear Quadratic Gaussian (MLQG) methodology in order to target critical inter-area electromechanical modes. The approach has been tested on a large (16 machine, 68 bus) test network incorporating parallel HVDC/AC transmission and has shown improved damping compared to a traditional Power System Stabilizer (PSS) based controller structure utilizing local signals. The design process has incorporated the effects of wide area signal transmission delays. Variation in these signal delays and the complete loss of signals has been also investigated to establish the robustness of the WAMS based controller and its sensitivity to loss of signals. Extension of the controller to incorporate reactive power modulation has been investigated, as has variation in available active power modulation capacity. The proposed controller performance has been assessed through small and large disturbance analysis.
-------------------------------------

10018311_234 - 0.850758243834 - science
[themis2, macrophage, protein, production, tnf, lps-induced]

Themis2/ICB1 is a signaling scaffold that selectively regulates macrophage Toll-like receptor signaling and cytokine production.
BACKGROUND: Thymocyte expressed molecule involved in selection 1 (Themis1, SwissProt accession number Q8BGW0) is the recently characterised founder member of a novel family of proteins. A second member of this family, Themis2 (Q91YX0), also known as ICB1 (Induced on contact with basement membrane 1), remains unreported at the protein level despite microarray and EST databases reporting Themis2 mRNA expression in B cells and macrophages. METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Here we characterise Themis2 protein for the first time and show that it acts as a macrophage signalling scaffold, exerting a receptor-, mediator- and signalling pathway-specific effect on TLR responses in RAW 264.7 macrophages. Themis2 over-expression enhanced the LPS-induced production of TNF but not IL-6 or Cox-2, nor TNF production induced by ligands for TLR2 (PAM3) or TLR3 (poly IratioC). Moreover, LPS-induced activation of the MAP kinases ERK and p38 was enhanced in cells over-expressing Themis2 whereas the activation of JNK, IRF3 or NF-kappaB p65, was unaffected. Depletion of Themis2 protein by RNA inteference inhibited LPS-induced TNF production in primary human macrophages demonstrating a requirement for Themis2 in this event. Themis2 was inducibly tyrosine phosphorylated upon LPS challenge and interacted with Lyn kinase (P25911), the Rho guanine nucleotide exchange factor, Vav (P27870), and the adaptor protein Grb2 (Q60631). Mutation of either tyrosine 660 or a proline-rich sequence (PPPRPPK) simultaneously interrupted this complex and reduced by approximately 50% the capacity of Themis2 to promote LPS-induced TNF production. Finally, Themis2 protein expression was induced during macrophage development from murine bone marrow precursors and was regulated by inflammatory stimuli both in vitro and in vivo. CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: We hypothesise that Themis2 may constitute a novel, physiological control point in macrophage inflammatory responses.
-------------------------------------

10007527_234 - 0.871645372786 - medicine
[patient, classifier, nsclc, prognostic, gene, three-gene, different, study, microarray, stage]

Three-gene prognostic classifier for early-stage non small-cell lung cancer.
PURPOSE: Several microarray studies have reported gene expression signatures that classify non-small-cell lung carcinoma (NSCLC) patients into different prognostic groups. However, the prognostic gene lists reported to date overlap poorly across studies, and few have been validated independently using more quantitative assay methods. PATIENTS AND METHODS: The expression of 158 putative prognostic genes identified in previous microarray studies was analyzed by reverse transcription quantitative polymerase chain reaction in the tumors of 147 NSCLC patients. Concordance indices and risk scores were used to identify a stage-independent set of genes that could classify patients with significantly different prognoses. RESULTS: We have identified a three-gene classifier (STX1A, HIF1A, and CCR7) for overall survival (hazard ratio = 3.8; 95% CI, 1.7 to 8.2; P < .001). The classifier was also able to stratify stage I and II patients and further improved the predictive ability of clinical factors such as histology and tumor stage. The predictive value of this three-gene classifier was validated in two large independent microarray data sets from Harvard and Duke Universities. CONCLUSION: We have identified a new three-gene classifier that is independent of and improves on stage to stratify early-stage NSCLC patients with significantly different prognoses. This classifier may be tested further for its potential value to improve the selection of resected NSCLC patients in adjuvant therapy.
-------------------------------------

10009782_234 - 0.706937233891 - science
[nail, terbinafine, fragment, fungus, dermatophyte, action]

Inhibitory effect of terbinafine on the invasion of nails by Trichophyton mentagrophytes.
BACKGROUND: Terbinafine has a broad spectrum of action in vitro and primary fungicidal action against many pathogenic fungi. Its mode of action against dermatophyte fungi in nail keratin is little understood. OBJECTIVE: Our purpose was to determine the bioavailability of terbinafine in a nail fragment model. METHODS: The effect of terbinafine on adherence and germination of arthroconidia of Trichophyton mentagrophytes on nail fragments was assessed by gross examination and light and electron microscopy. RESULTS: Preexposure of nail fragments to terbinafine concentrations (0.001 to 10 mg/L) inhibited fungal growth and acted as a barrier to dermatophyte invasion. Damaged arthroconidia and distorted hyphae on the surface of nail fragments were observed. CONCLUSION: This in vitro model provides an alternative system for studying the activity of antifungal agents in nail and demonstrates the morphologic changes in dermatophyte fungi after exposure to terbinafine.
-------------------------------------

10005607_234 - 0.764588965373 - medicine
[bowel, syndrome, irritable, symptom, prevalence, gynecological, woman, clinic, control]

Irritable bowel syndrome in the gynecological clinic. Survey of 798 new referrals.
A study of the prevalence of symptoms suggestive of irritable bowel syndrome in 798 women referred to a gynecological clinic is reported; 321 women referred to dermatology and ear, nose, and throat clinics served as controls. Data were collected by a mailed symptom questionnaire. The prevalence of irritable bowel syndrome in the gynecological group was 37.3% compared with 27.7% in controls (P = 0.003). Approximately 50% of women referred with abdominal pain, dyspareunia, and dysmenorrhea had symptoms compatible with irritable bowel syndrome (P less than 0.005), whereas the prevalence in those referred for cervical abnormalities, termination/sterilization or perineal problems was similar to that of controls (28%). Patients referred with urinary symptoms, heavy periods, nonmenstrual bleeding, vaginal discharge, and infertility had an intermediate prevalence of irritable bowel syndrome (35-45%). This study suggests that either many women with irritable bowel syndrome are being wrongly referred to gynecologists or raises the possibility that symptoms currently regarded as indicative of irritable bowel syndrome may be associated with certain gynecological disorders.
-------------------------------------

10014388_234 - 0.881548034459 - science
[adpa, mutant, blda, codon, gene, aerial, leucine, bldh109]

A rare leucine codon in adpA is implicated in the morphological defect of bldA mutants of Streptomyces coelicolor
Streptomycetes are mycelial bacteria that produce sporulating aerial hyphae on solid media. Bald (bld) mutants fail to form aerial mycelium under at least some conditions. bldA encodes the only tRNA species able to read the leucine codon UUA efficiently, implying the involvement of a TTA-containing gene in initiating aerial growth. One candidate for such a gene was bldH, because the bldH109 mutant of Streptomyces coelicolor resembles bldA mutants in some aspects. In the work reported here, adpA c, an S. coelicolor gene similar to the Streptomyces griseus A factor-regulated adpAg, was found to complement the bldH109 mutant partially at both single and multiple copies. The sequence of adpA c from the bldH109 mutant revealed a frameshift. A constructed in frame deletion of adpA c conferred a bald colony phenotype, and the mutant behaved like bldA mutants and bldH109 in its pattern of extracellular signal exchange. Both adpA c and adpAg contain a TTA codon. A TTA-free version of adpA c was engineered by replacing the TTA leucine codon with a cognate TTG leucine codon. The adpA(TTA???TTG) gene could partially restore aerial mycelium formation to a bldA mutant when it was followed in cis by the gene ornA, as in the natural chromosomal arrangement. This indicated that the UUA codon in adpA c mRNA is the principal target through which bldA influences morphological differentiation. It also implied that translational arrest at the UUA codon in adpA c mRNA caused a polar effect on the downstream ornA, and that the poor translation of both genes contributes extensively to the deficiency of aerial mycelium formation in bldA mutants. Unlike the situation in S. griseus, adpA c transcription does not depend on the host's ??-butyrolactone signalling system, at least in liquid cultures. In addition, sigma factor BldN, which is the homologue of an S. griseus sigma factor AdsA that is absent from adpA g mutants of S. griseus, was present in the constructed adpA c null mutant of S. coelicolor.
-------------------------------------

10017800_234 - 0.964924644519 - science
[synthesis, glycopeptide, glycan]

Chemoenzymatic Synthesis of O-Mannosylpeptides in Solution and on Solid Phase
O-Mannosyl glycans are known to play an important role in regulating the function of α-dystroglycan (α-DG), as defective glycosylation is associated with various phenotypes of congenital muscular dystrophy. Despite the well-established biological significance of these glycans, questions regarding their precise molecular function remain unanswered. Further biological investigation will require synthetic methods for the generation of pure samples of homogeneous glycopeptides with diverse sequences. Here we describe the first total syntheses of glycopeptides containing the tetrasaccharide NeuNAcα2-3Galβ1-4GlcNAcβ1-2Manα, which is reported to be the most abundant O-mannosyl glycan on α-DG. Our approach is based on biomimetic stepwise assembly from the reducing end and also gives access to the naturally occurring mono-, di-, and trisaccharide substructures. In addition to the total synthesis, we have developed a “one-pot” enzymatic cascade leading to the rapid synthesis of the target tetrasaccharide. Finally, solid-phase synthesis of the desired glycopeptides directly on a gold microarray platform is described.
-------------------------------------

10018164_234 - 0.862219028199 - science
[cell, spectroscopy, ft-ir, analysis, anaerobic, oneidensis, growth, different, mr-1, various]

Phenotypic Characterization of Shewanella oneidensis MR-1 under Aerobic and Anaerobic Growth Conditions by Using Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy and High-Performance Liquid Chromatography Analyses
Shewanella oneidensis is able to conserve energy for growth by reducing a wide variety of terminal electron acceptors during anaerobic respiration, including several environmentally hazardous pollutants. This bacterium employs various electron transfer mechanisms for anaerobic respiration, including cell-bound reductases and secreted redox mediators. The aim of this study was to develop rapid tools for profiling the key metabolic changes associated with these different growth regimes and physiological responses. Initial experiments focused on comparing cells grown under aerobic and anaerobic conditions. Fourier transform infrared (FT-IR) spectroscopy with cluster analysis showed that there were significant changes in the metabolic fingerprints of the cells grown under these two culture conditions. FT-IR spectroscopy clearly differentiated cells of S. oneidensis MR-1 cultured at various growth points and cells grown using different electron acceptors, resulting in different phenotypic trajectories in the cluster analysis. This growth-related trajectory analysis is applied successfully for the first time, here with FT-IR spectroscopy, to investigate the phenotypic changes in contrasting S. oneidensis cells. High-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) was also used to quantify the concentrations of flavin compounds, which have been identified recently as extracellular redox mediators released by a range of Shewanella species. The partial least-squares regression (PLSR) multivariate statistical technique was combined with FT-IR spectroscopy to predict the concentrations of the flavins secreted by cells of S. oneidensis MR-1, suggesting that this combination could be used as a rapid alternative to conventional chromatographic methods for analysis of flavins in cell cultures. Furthermore, coupling of the FT-IR spectroscopy and HPLC techniques appears to offer a potentially useful tool for rapid characterization of the Shewanella cell metabolome in various process environments.
-------------------------------------

10003674_234 - 0.89731693628 - science
[field, droplet, electric, vibration, water]

FEA Modelling of a water droplet vibrating in an electric field
The dynamic behaviour of water droplets subject to AC electric fields is investigated by experiment and finite element modelling. The motion of a water droplet is considered on the surface of a metallic sphere. To understand the consequences of vibration, the FEA model is introduced to study the dynamics of a single droplet in terms of phase shift between vibration and exciting voltage. Moreover, the evolution of electric field within the whole cycle of vibration is investigated.The finite element treatment to couple the electromagnetic field with multi-phase flow field is described. The profile of the electric field and the characteristics of mechanical vibration are evaluated. Surprisingly the phase shift in these characteristics results in the maximum field occurring when the droplet is in a flattened profile rather than when it is ‘pointed’.
-------------------------------------

10013598_234 - 0.706625377445 - science
[aerosol, concn, flux, size, velocity, emission, activity]

Direct measurements and parameterisation of aerosol flux, concentration and emission velocity above a city.
Articles have recently been published on aerosol size distributions and no. concns. in cities, however there have been no studies on transport of these particles. Eddy covariance measurements of vertical transport of aerosol in the size range 11 nm < Dp < 3 mm are presented here. The anal. shows that typical av. aerosol no. fluxes in this size range vary between 9000 and 90,000/cm2-s. With concns. between 3000 and 20,000/cm3 this leads to ests. of particle emission velocity between 20 and 75 mm/s. The relationships between no. flux and traffic activity, along with emission velocity and boundary layer stability are demonstrated and parameterised. These are used to derive an empirical parameterisation for aerosol concn. in terms of traffic activity and stability. The main processes detg. urban aerosol fluxes and concns. are discussed and quantified where possible. The difficulties in parameterizing urban activity are discussed. on SciFinder (R)
-------------------------------------

10010343_234 - 0.939407958684 - science
[synthetic, secondary, metabolomic, metabolism, metabolic, compound]

Metabolomics methods for the synthetic biology of secondary metabolism
Many microbial secondary metabolites are of high biotechnological value for medicine, agriculture, and the food industry. Bacterial genome mining has revealed numerous novel secondary metabolite biosynthetic gene clusters, which encode the potential to synthesize a large diversity of compounds that have never been observed before. The stimulation or "awakening" of this cryptic microbial secondary metabolism has naturally attracted the attention of synthetic microbiologists, who exploit recent advances in DNA sequencing and synthesis to achieve unprecedented control over metabolic pathways. One of the indispensable tools in the synthetic biology toolbox is metabolomics, the global quantification of small biomolecules. This review illustrates the pivotal role of metabolomics for the synthetic microbiology of secondary metabolism, including its crucial role in novel compound discovery in microbes, the examination of side products of engineered metabolic pathways, as well as the identification of major bottlenecks for the overproduction of compounds of interest, especially in combination with metabolic modeling. We conclude by highlighting remaining challenges and recent technological advances that will drive metabolomics towards fulfilling its potential as a cornerstone technology of synthetic microbiology. ?? 2012 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
-------------------------------------

10017775_234 - 0.743280667833 - science
[protein, activation, upr]

Inhibition of protein translocation at the endoplasmic reticulum promotes activation of the unfolded protein response
Selective small-molecule inhibitors represent powerful tools for the dissection of complex biological processes. ESI (eeyarestatin I) is a novel modulator of ER (endoplasmic reticulum) function. In the present study, we show that in addition to acutely inhibiting ERAD (ER-associated degradation), ESI causes production of mislocalized polypeptides that are ubiquitinated and degraded. Unexpectedly, our results suggest that these non-translocated polypeptides promote activation of the UPR (unfolded protein response), and indeed we can recapitulate UPR activation with an alternative and quite distinct inhibitor of ER translocation. These results suggest that the accumulation of non-translocated proteins in the cytosol may represent a novel mechanism that contributes to UPR activation.
-------------------------------------

10008488_234 - 0.875545840279 - medicine
[radiotherapy, recurrence, surgery, risk, relapse, year, rt, nerve, control, high]

An analysis of the treatment of 114 patients with recurrent pleomorphic adenomas of the parotid gland
BACKGROUND: Nerve preserving surgery is widely recommended for recurrent parotid pleomorphic adenomas though the risk of further relapse may be high. Adjuvant radiotherapy may improve control but its exact role requires clarification. METHODS: A series of 114 patients with first recurrences treated between 1952 and 1992 is reviewed. Treatment modality was either surgery alone (SG; n = 63) or surgery with radiotherapy (SG + RT; n = 51). Results were determined with respect to long-term tumor control (K-M life-tables) and facial nerve function. RESULTS: The rate to second recurrence was 15% (17/114), median follow-up 14 years. There were no cases of malignant degeneration. Multinodular recurrences treated by SG were at particular high risk of relapse, but control was significantly improved with adjuvant radiotherapy (SG versus SG = RT; 43% versus 4% at 15 years, P = 0.008). In contrast, no difference was demonstrated in the uninodular tumor group (SG versus SG = RT; 15% versus 13% at 15 years, P = 0.9). The incidence of permanent facial nerve injury was 15%. CONCLUSIONS: This study emphasizes the distinction between multinodular and uninodular recurrences; the former is at high risk of relapse and benefits from adjuvant radiotherapy whereas solitary tumors may be adequately treated by surgery alone.
-------------------------------------

10003507_234 - 0.750318411943 - science
[acoustic, cell, tissue, phase, method, soft, substrate]

Multi-layer phase analysis: quantifying the elastic properties of soft tissues and live cells with ultra-high-frequency scanning acoustic microscopy.
Scanning acoustic microscopy is potentially a powerful tool for characterizing the elastic properties of soft biological tissues and cells. In this paper, we present a method, multi-layer phase analysis (MLPA), which can be used to extract local speed of sound values, for both thin tissue sections mounted on glass slides and cultured cells grown on cell culture plastic, with a resolution close to 1 μm. The method exploits the phase information that is preserved in the interference between the acoustic wave reflected from the substrate surface and internal reflections from the acoustic lens. In practice, a stack of acoustic images are captured beginning with the acoustic focal point 4 μm above the substrate surface and moving down in 0.1-μm increments. Scanning parameters, such as acoustic wave frequency and gate position, were adjusted to obtain optimal phase and lateral resolution. The data were processed offline to extract the phase information with the contribution of any inclination in the substrate removed before the calculation of sound speed. Here, we apply this approach to both skin sections and fibroblast cells, and compare our data with the V(f) (voltage versus frequency) method that has previously been used for characterization of soft tissues and cells. Compared with the V(f) method, the MPLA method not only reduces signal noise but can be implemented without making a priori assumptions with regards to tissue or cell parameters.
-------------------------------------

10010341_234 - 0.756276673727 - science
[strain, gene, change, clavulanic, acid]

Genome-wide gene expression changes in an industrial clavulanic acid overproduction strain of Streptomyces clavuligerus
To increase production of the important pharmaceutical compound clavulanic acid, a ??-lactamase inhibitor, both random mutagenesis approaches and rational engineering of Streptomyces clavuligerus strains have been extensively applied. Here, for the first time, we compared genome-wide gene expression of an industrial S. clavuligerus strain, obtained through iterative mutagenesis, with that of the wild-type strain. Intriguingly, we found that the majority of the changes contributed not to a complex rewiring of primary metabolism but consisted of a simple upregulation of various antibiotic biosynthesis gene clusters. A few additional transcriptional changes in primary metabolism at key points seem to divert metabolic fluxes to the biosynthetic precursors for clavulanic acid. In general, the observed changes largely coincide with genes that have been targeted by rational engineering in recent years, yet the presence of a number of previously unexplored genes clearly demonstrates that functional genomic analysis can provide new leads for strain improvement in biotechnology. ?? 2010 The Authors. Journal compilation ?? 2010 Society for Applied Microbiology and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
-------------------------------------

10009426_234 - 0.708523063877 - science
[insect, fossil]

X-ray micro-tomography of Carboniferous stem-Dictyoptera: new insights into early insects.
Computer reconstructions of Archimylacris eggintoni, a Carboniferous stem-group dictyopteran ('roachoid'), are presented. A siderite-hosted specimen was scanned using high-resolution X-ray microtomography (microCT), and a 'virtual fossil' was created with a resolution of 17.7 microm. This has revealed the morphology in great detail, including adhesive limb structures indicative of climbing and specializations for rapid movement. The antennae are filiform, and the mandibles are comparable to those of certain extant cockroaches, suggesting a similar generalist, saprophagous diet. The reconstruction reveals a high degree of specialization, and provides insights into the mode of life of these common Palaeozoic insects. Further microCT study of insect fossils has the potential to supplement wing venation with new characters, and hence improve fossil insect phylogenies.
-------------------------------------

10011536_234 - 0.71279448646 - technology_and_computing
[component, contract, software, compliant, spark]

A Case Study in Constructing Contract Compliant Software Components
In the recent few years there has been in the Software Engineering   community, a strong interest towards Component Based Software Development   (CBSD). Currently, CBSD faces lots of problems that need to be solved   before it can be widely used. A critical question is how a client can trust   a component. The answer is to provide a contract for the component and also   prove that the component is compliant with it. In this project we use   SPARK, a critical systems’ programming language, to develop two components,   provide contracts for them and prove that the components comply with the   contracts. Our aim is to check whether SPARK can be used in the   construction of contract compliant software components, and how this is   accomplished. We conclude that apart from some disadvantages, SPARK can   indeed be used in the construction of contract compliant software   components.
-------------------------------------

10009582_234 - 0.874690991186 - science
[mouse, braf, melanoma, melanocyte, tumor, v600e]

Oncogenic Braf induces melanocyte senescence and melanoma in mice.
We show here that inducible expression of Braf(V600E) off the endogenous Braf gene in mouse melanocytes stimulates skin hyperpigmentation and the appearance of nevi harboring senescent melanocytes. Additionally, approximately 70% of Braf(V600E) mice develop melanomas that reproduce many of the cardinal histological and molecular features of human melanoma and whose cells can colonize the lungs of nude mice. We show that the tumor suppressor p16(INK4a) is not required to induce melanocyte senescence and that its loss is not required for tumor progression, although it does regulate tumor penetrance and latency. Thus, we have developed a mouse model of melanoma driven by Braf(V600E) expressed at physiological levels that reflects the genetics and pathology of the human disease.
-------------------------------------

10005566_234 - 0.921320182523 - medicine
[patient, uva, photosensitivity, retinol]

Voriconazole-induced photosensitivity: photobiological assessment of a                    case series of 12 patients.
BACKGROUND: Voriconazole, a                        broad-spectrum triazole antifungal agent increasingly used to treat                        aspergillosis, has been linked with acute photosensitivity and skin                        carcinogenesis. The action spectrum of the photosensitivity is unknown,                        while an indirect retinol effect secondary to the antifungal's impact on                        CYP450 enzymes has been proposed to contribute to the underlying                        mechanism. OBJECTIVES: To perform a detailed                        photobiological assessment of the photosensitivity presenting in a series of                        12 patients treated with voriconazole. METHODS: Minimal erythemal dose                        thresholds (MED) to narrow wavebands of ultraviolet (UV) A, UVB and visible                        light were determined. Provocation testing was performed to broadband UVA                        (310-400 nm) and to solar-simulated radiation (SSR) (290-400 nm). Patients                        underwent routine photopatch testing and laboratory investigations including                        serum vitamin A (retinol). RESULTS: Patients (eight men, four                        women; median age 54years, range 40-63) experienced moderate-severe                        cutaneous erythema (n = 12), burning pain (n=5), itching (n=3), scaling                        (n=5), vesiculation (n=5) and oedema (n=1) following sunlight exposure;                        increased lentigines (n=4) and actinic cheilitis (n = 4) were also observed.                        While the majority (n=8) of patients showed normal MED thresholds to                        monochromator phototesting to UVB, UVA and visible light, a low MED to UVA                        was observed in four patients. Repeated provocation testing with broadband                        UVA and SSR provoked an abnormal erythema in eight and 10 patients,                        respectively. Serum retinol levels were mildly elevated in two patients but                        normal in the majority. CONCLUSION:  UVA sensitivity is                        the predominant finding in acute voriconazole-induced photosensitivity. We                        found little evidence of elevated circulating retinol as the causal factor.                        Patients with voriconazole-induced photosensitivity require education in                        appropriate UVA protective measures in addition to consideration of skin                        surveillance for malignant sequelae.
-------------------------------------

10011521_234 - 0.811937981923 - science
[transgenic, nucleus, sperm, embryo]

Generating Transgenic Frog Embryos by Restriction Enzyme Mediated Integration (REMI).
Here we present a protocol for generating transgenic embryos in Xenopus laevis and Xenopus tropicalis. The method includes three steps: (1) The preparation of high-speed egg extracts, which facilitates the replacement of protamines in sperm nuclei with nucleosomes and decondenses the chromatin of sperm nuclei; (2) The isolation of sperm nuclei; and (3) The mixing of sperm nuclei, restriction enzyme, and high-speed extract in vitro, following by nuclear transplantation into unfertilized eggs to generate the transgenic embryos. This procedure generates non-mosaic transgenic embryos at high frequency and efficiency.
-------------------------------------

10003619_234 - 0.740902616465 - medicine
[care, trial, hospital, therapeutic, temperature, water, hypothermium, neurological, infant, cranial]

Pilot randomized trial of therapeutic hypothermia with serial cranial ultrasound and 18-22 month follow-up for neonatal encephalopathy in a low resource hospital setting in Uganda: study protocol.
BACKGROUND: There is now convincing evidence that in industrialized countries therapeutic hypothermia for perinatal asphyxial encephalopathy increases survival with normal neurological function. However, the greatest burden of perinatal asphyxia falls in low and mid-resource settings where it is unclear whether therapeutic hypothermia is safe and effective. AIMS: Under the UCL Uganda Women's Health Initiative, a pilot randomized controlled trial in infants with perinatal asphyxia was set up in the special care baby unit in Mulago Hospital, a large public hospital with ~20,000 births in Kampala, Uganda to determine:(i) The feasibility of achieving consent, neurological assessment, randomization and whole body cooling to a core temperature 33-34°C using water bottles(ii) The temperature profile of encephalopathic infants with standard care(iii) The pattern, severity and evolution of brain tissue injury as seen on cranial ultrasound and relation with outcome(iv) The feasibility of neurodevelopmental follow-up at 18-22 months of age METHODS/DESIGN: Ethical approval was obtained from Makerere University and Mulago Hospital. All infants were in-born. Parental consent for entry into the trial was obtained. Thirty-six infants were randomized either to standard care plus cooling (target rectal temperature of 33-34°C for 72 hrs, started within 3 h of birth) or standard care alone. All other aspects of management were the same. Cooling was performed using water bottles filled with tepid tap water (25°C). Rectal, axillary, ambient and surface water bottle temperatures were monitored continuously for the first 80 h. Encephalopathy scoring was performed on days 1-4, a structured, scorable neurological examination and head circumference were performed on days 7 and 17. Cranial ultrasound was performed on days 1, 3 and 7 and scored. Griffiths developmental quotient, head circumference, neurological examination and assessment of gross motor function were obtained at 18-22 months. DISCUSSION: We will highlight differences in neonatal care and infrastructure that need to be taken into account when considering a large safety and efficacy RCT of therapeutic hypothermia in low and mid resource settings in the future. TRIAL REGISTRATION: Current controlled trials ISRCTN92213707.
-------------------------------------

10007268_234 - 0.704285313995 - science
[cell, receptor, chain, functional, cd34, hybrid, hematopoietic]

Detection of a functional hybrid receptor gammac/GM-CSFRbeta in human hematopoietic CD34+ cells.
A functional hybrid receptor associating the common gamma chain (gammac) with the granulocyte/macrophage colony-stimulating factor receptor beta (GM-CSFRbeta) chain is found in mobilized human peripheral blood (MPB) CD34+ hematopoietic progenitors, SCF/Flt3-L primed cord blood (CB) precursors (CBPr CD34+/CD56-), and CD34+ myeloid cell lines, but not in normal natural killer (NK) cells, the cytolytic NK-L cell line or nonhematopoietic cells. We demonstrated, using CD34+ TF1beta cells, which express an interleukin (IL)-15Ralpha/beta/gammac receptor, that within the hybrid receptor, the GM-CSFRbeta chain inhibits the IL-15-triggered gammac/JAK3-specific signaling controlling TF1beta cell proliferation. However, the gammac chain is part of a functional GM-CSFR, activating GM-CSF-dependent STAT5 nuclear translocation and the proliferation of TF1beta cells. The hybrid receptor is functional in normal hematopoietic progenitors in which both subunits control STAT5 activation. Finally, the parental TF1 cell line, which lacks the IL-15Rbeta chain, nevertheless expresses both a functional hybrid receptor that controls JAK3 phosphorylation and a novel IL-15alpha/gammac/TRAF2 complex that triggers nuclear factor kappaB activation. The lineage-dependent distribution and function of these receptors suggest that they are involved in hematopoiesis because they modify transduction pathways that play a major role in the differentiation of hematopoietic progenitors.
-------------------------------------

10009381_234 - 0.834738056853 - science
[resistance, aspergillosis, azole, number]

Azole antifungal resistance today: focus on Aspergillus.
Oral triazole therapy is well established for the treatment of invasive aspergillosis (IPA), allergic aspergillosis (ABPA), and chronic pulmonary aspergillosis (CPA), and is often long-term. Resistance to triazole azole antifungal drugs in Aspergillus fumigatus is now a major clinical problem in a number of European locations, in China, Canada and the USA with particularly high frequencies from the north-west of the UK, and The Netherlands. A number of centers are reporting the continuing increasing frequency and evolution of resistance mechanisms in A. fumigatus, in both azole-naïve and patients treated with azoles. The increasing rate of resistance is of concern. A number of resistance mechanisms have been found. The biofilm modality of Aspergillus growth may have a number of therapeutic implications for aspergillosis, including antifungal resistance. Microbiological diagnosis of aspergillosis is limited by poor culture yield, leading to uncertainty about the frequency of triazole resistance. Direct resistance testing in culture-negative clinical samples may add additional insights into the prevalence of azole resistance in A. fumigatus.
-------------------------------------

10017084_234 - 0.815019814204 - science
[expression, skin, elastic, fibre, change, component, aged, gene, age, fold]

Differential expression of elastic fibre components in intrinsically aged skin.
Intrinsic ageing of the skin is a subtle process resulting in some degree of skin laxity. The dermal elastic fibre network imbues skin with the capacity to recoil and loss of this property contributes to an aged, wrinkled appearance. Whilst elastic fibres have a complex, composite structure which allows them to fulfil multiple roles, the effects of intrinsic ageing on their discrete molecular components has not previously been explored. In this study, we have used a microarray-based approach to perform a novel survey of the changes in gene expression that occur in components of cutaneous elastic fibres as a result of intrinsic ageing. Age-related changes in gene expression were validated at the mRNA and protein levels using quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) and immunostaining, respectively. The microarray revealed that the majority of elastic fibre network components were unchanged with age. However, three differentially expressed genes were identified: latent TGFβ-binding protein (LTBP)-2 which was up-regulated with age (fold change +1.58, P = 0.041); LTBP3 (fold change -1.67, P = 0.025) and the lysyl oxidase-like enzyme (LOXL1, fold change -1.47, P = 0.008) which were both down-regulated with age. Although the changes in gene expression for LTBP3 were not confirmed by either qPCR or immunostaining, the expression and tissue deposition of both LTBP2 and LOXL1 were significantly enhanced in intrinsically aged skin. Whilst the functional implications of these altered expression profiles remains to be elucidated, LTBP2 and LOXL1 are thought to play important roles in controlling and maintaining elastic fibre deposition, assembly and structure via binding to fibulin-5. Consequently, any age-related perturbations in the expression of these components may have important consequences on remodelling of the extracellular matrix and hence on the mechanical properties of intrinsically aged skin.
-------------------------------------

10015110_234 - 0.903718436491 - science
[temperature, composition, salinity, isotope, carbonate, calcium, mineralogy, effect]

Effect of mineralogy, salinity, and temperature on Li/Ca and Li isotope composition of calcium carbonate
cited By (since 1996) 26
-------------------------------------

10009683_234 - 0.809840707474 - science
[kinase, erk5, protein, fasl, cell, mek5]

Activation of extracellular signal-regulated protein kinase 5 downregulates FasL upon osmotic stress.
Extracellular signal-regulated protein kinase (ERK) 5 is a mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) that is activated by dual phosphorylation via a unique MAPK/ERK kinase 5, MEK5. The physiological importance of this signaling cascade is underscored by the early embryonic death caused by the targeted deletion of the erk5 or the mek5 genes in mice. Here, we have found that ERK5 is required for mediating the survival of fibroblasts under basal conditions and in response to sorbitol treatment. Increased Fas ligand (FasL) expression acts as a positive feedback loop to enhance apoptosis of ERK5- or MEK5-deficient cells under conditions of osmotic stress. Compared to wild-type cells, erk5-/- and mek5-/- fibroblasts treated with sorbitol display a reduced protein kinase B (PKB) activity associated with increased Forkhead box O3a (Foxo3a) activity. Based on these results, we conclude that the ERK5 signaling pathway promotes cell survival by downregulating FasL expression via a mechanism that implicates PKB-dependent inhibition of Foxo3a downstream of phosphoinositide 3 kinase.
-------------------------------------

10003732_234 - 0.756093463282 - science
[cell, apoptosis, cancer, interaction, breast]

Disruption of the interaction between PMCA2 and calcineurin triggers apoptosis and enhances paclitaxel-induced cytotoxicity in breast cancer cells.
Cancer is caused by defects in the signalling mechanisms that govern cell proliferation and apoptosis. It is well known that calcium-dependent signalling pathways play a critical role in cell regulation. A tight control of calcium homeostasis by transporters and channel proteins is required to assure a proper functioning of the calcium-sensitive signal transduction pathways that regulate cell growth and apoptosis. The plasma membrane calcium ATPase 2 (PMCA2) has been recently identified as a negative regulator of apoptosis that can play a significant role in cancer progression by conferring cells resistance to apoptosis. We have previously reported an inhibitory interaction between PMCA2 and the calcium-activated signalling molecule calcineurin in breast cancer cells. Here, we demonstrate that disruption of the PMCA2/calcineurin interaction in a variety of human breast cancer cells results in activation of the calcineurin/NFAT pathway, upregulation in the expression of the pro-apoptotic protein Fas Ligand and in a concomitant loss of cell viability. Reduction in cell viability is the consequence of an increase in cell apoptosis. Impairment of the PMCA2/calcineurin interaction enhances paclitaxel-mediated cytotoxicity of breast tumoral cells. Our results suggest that therapeutic modulation of the PMCA2/calcineurin interaction might have important clinical applications to improve current treatments for breast cancer patients.
-------------------------------------

10007493_234 - 0.871445877376 - medicine
[recurrence, nodal, ptv, patient, eni, ld-sclc, distant]

Omitting elective nodal irradiation during thoracic irradiation in limited-stage small cell lung cancer--evidence from a phase II trial.
Omitting elective nodal irradiation (ENI) in limited-stage disease small cell lung cancer (LD-SCLC) is expected to result in smaller radiation fields. We report on data from a randomised phase II trial that omitted ENI in patients receiving concurrent chemo-radiotherapy for LD-SCLC. 38 patients with LD-SCLC were randomised to receive once-daily (66 Gy in 33 fractions) or twice-daily (45 Gy in 30 fractions) radiotherapy (RT). 3D-conformal RT was given concurrently with cisplatin and etoposide starting with the second cycle of a total of four cycles. The gross tumour volume was defined as primary tumour with involved lymph nodes (nodes ≥1 cm in short axis) identifiable with CT imaging. ENI was not used. Six recurrence patterns were identified: recurrence within planning target volume (PTV) only, recurrence within PTV+regional nodal recurrence and/or distant recurrence, isolated nodal recurrence outside PTV, nodal recurrence outside PTV+distant recurrence, distant metastases only and no recurrence. At median follow-up 16.9 months, 31/38 patients were evaluable and 14/31 patients had relapsed. There were no isolated nodal recurrences. Eight patients relapsed with intra-thoracic disease: 2 within PTV only, 4 within PTV and distantly and 2 with nodal recurrence outside PTV plus distant metastases. Rates of grade 3+ acute oesophagitis and pneumonitis in the 31 evaluable patients were 23 and 3% respectively. In our study of LD-SCLC, omitting ENI based on CT imaging was not associated with a high risk of isolated nodal recurrence, although further prospective studies are needed to confirm this. Routine ENI omission will be further evaluated prospectively in the ongoing phase III CONVERT trial (NCT00433563).
-------------------------------------

10007322_234 - 0.701347779482 - science
[susceptibility, diabetes, genetic, locus, t2d, type, variant, analysis, association, architecture]

Large-scale association analysis provides insights into the genetic architecture and pathophysiology of type 2 diabetes.
To extend understanding of the genetic architecture and molecular basis of type 2 diabetes (T2D), we conducted a meta-analysis of genetic variants on the Metabochip, including 34,840 cases and 114,981 controls, overwhelmingly of European descent. We identified ten previously unreported T2D susceptibility loci, including two showing sex-differentiated association. Genome-wide analyses of these data are consistent with a long tail of additional common variant loci explaining much of the variation in susceptibility to T2D. Exploration of the enlarged set of susceptibility loci implicates several processes, including CREBBP-related transcription, adipocytokine signaling and cell cycle regulation, in diabetes pathogenesis.
-------------------------------------

10017117_234 - 0.865823544748 - science
[versican, vg1, hyaluronan, binding, disease, interaction, function]

Structural and Functional Studies on the G1 Domain of Human Versican
The chondroitin sulphate proteoglycan (CSPG) versican forms complexes with hyaluronan (HA), which are essential in a range of functions including cellular proliferation and migration. Four isoforms of versican result from alternative splicing. Furthermore, biological roles have been identified for the proteolytic cleavage product of versican which contains the N-terminal G1 hyaluronan binding domain. All of these versican forms have different tightly regulated tissue expression profiles. Consequently, impaired regulation is associated with a number of disease pathologies. For example the largest variants (V0/V1) have been shown to be negative indicators of disease outcome in a number of malignant cancers and are a marker of disease progression in atherosclerosis. Interestingly, the smaller versican isoform V3 which lacks CS chains has been demonstrated to have the potential to reverse disease associated phenotypes. The motivation for carrying out the work in this thesis was to try and gain a better understanding of how versican functions on a molecular scale. In this regard, the first aim was to investigate the structure of the hyaluronan binding region of versican using a construct called VG1. The structure of VG1 was analysed in the presence and absence of hyaluronan oligomers. This revealed an insight into the multi-modular structure of the versican hyaluronan binding region and demonstrated that on binding to HA, VG1 under goes a conformational change. Furthermore, the interaction between VG1 and longer lengths of hyaluronan (pHA) was investigated. This demonstrated that when VG1 binds to pHA it is does so with positive cooperativity, packing very close to neighbouring VG1 molecules along a chain of HA. One consequence of this interaction was to reorganise pHA into a helical conformation, an organisation that was confirmed by a number of solution phase techniques. The effect of this reorganisation of pHA by VG1 on HA/CD44 interactions was also assessed. Previously the interaction between CD44 (a cell surface hyaluronan receptor) and long chains of HA (>30 kDa) was shown to be irreversible; however we demonstrate that VG1 can reverse this. Furthermore, a TSG-6 enhanced CD44/interaction was also completely reversed by the addition of VG1.  This provides an indication that a functional hierarchy of hyaluronan binding proteins may exist which could have important implications in understanding the function of hyaluronan complexes.Currently, we do not know whether intact versican molecules could interact with HA in the same way as VG1. However, preliminary data suggests that the CS-containing variants (i.e. V0, V1 and V2) would not, whereas V3 and versican fragments could. This work provides an exciting mechanistic insight into the function of versican variants and their breakdown products.
-------------------------------------

10003462_234 - 0.896859674861 - science
[brain, astrocyte, cell, synaptic, disease]

Glial cells in (patho)physiology.
Neuroglial cells define brain homeostasis and mount defense against pathological insults. Astroglia regulate neurogenesis and development of brain circuits. In the adult brain, astrocytes enter into intimate dynamic relationship with neurons, especially at synaptic sites where they functionally form the tripartite synapse. At these sites, astrocytes regulate ion and neurotransmitter homeostasis, metabolically support neurons and monitor synaptic activity; one of the readouts of the latter manifests in astrocytic intracellular Ca(2+) signals. This form of astrocytic excitability can lead to release of chemical transmitters via Ca(2+) -dependent exocytosis. Once in the extracellular space, gliotransmitters can modulate synaptic plasticity and cause changes in behavior. Besides these physiological tasks, astrocytes are fundamental for progression and outcome of neurological diseases. In Alzheimer's disease, for example, astrocytes may contribute to the etiology of this disorder. Highly lethal glial-derived tumors use signaling trickery to coerce normal brain cells to assist tumor invasiveness. This review not only sheds new light on the brain operation in health and disease, but also points to many unknowns.
-------------------------------------

10005578_234 - 0.790196349854 - science
[antibody, gastric, gclo, normal, ulcer, patient]

Antibody to the gastric campylobacter-like organism ("Campylobacter pyloridis")--clinical correlations and distribution in the normal population.
Different cellular proteins of the gastric campylobacter-like organism (GCLO) were shown to be immunogenic for man. Antibodies to GCLO were detected in sera by both complement fixation and enzyme-linked immunoabsorbent assay. Antibody was found in 133 (52%) of 254 patients attending for gastroscopy. There was a high correlation between presence of antibody and a positive GCLO culture from the gastric mucus. Patients with normal endoscopic appearances, duodenal ulcer, duodenitis and oesophagitis had similar prevalences (c. 50%) of antibody. Only patients with endoscopically visible gastritis or gastric ulcer had a higher frequency (c. 80%) of antibody. In a normal population, antibody was uncommon in individuals less than 20 years old, but the prevalence of antibody increased (to c. 50%) with age. There was little evidence to support an important pathological role for GCLO in disorders of the upper gastrointestinal tract, although the possibility that it may be a co-factor in the pathogenesis of gastric ulcer cannot be excluded.
-------------------------------------

10017142_234 - 0.871945771609 - science
[dark, perturbation, field, model, sector, equation, energy, gravity]

Generalized perturbations in modified gravity and dark energy
When recent observational data and the GR+FRW+CDM model are combined we obtain the result that the Universe is accelerating, where the acceleration is due to some not-yet-understood "dark sector". There has been a considerable number of theoretical models constructed in an attempt to provide a description of the dark sector: dark energy and modified gravity theories. The proliferation of modified gravity and dark energy models has brought to light the need to construct a "generic" way to parameterize perturbations in the dark sector. In this thesis we   discuss our new way of approaching this problem. We write down an effective action for linearized perturbations to the gravitational field equations for a given field content and use it to compute generalized gravitational field equations for linearized perturbations. Our approach is inspired by that taken in particle physics, where the most general modifications to the standard model are written down for a given field content that is compatible with some assumed symmetry (which we take to be isotropy of the background spatial sections). After applying the formalism we obtain equations of state for dark sector perturbations, where the number of free parameters for wide classes of theories are identified.
-------------------------------------

10005691_234 - 0.827835590889 - science
[microscopy, rectal, disease, electron, group, crohn, mucosa]

Scanning electron microscopy of rectal mucosa in Crohn's disease.
Rectal biopsies from healthy control subjects, and from patients with Crohn's disease whose rectal mucosa appeared normal by sigmoidoscopy and light microscopy, were examined by scanning electron microscopy. Appearances within both groups were quite variable, and no clear differences between the groups could be distinguished.
-------------------------------------

10011378_234 - 0.838299277727 - science
[graphene, atom, metal, process, calculation, formation]

Direct Experimental Evidence of Metal-Mediated Etching of Suspended Graphene
Atomic resolution high angle annular dark field imaging of suspended, single-layer graphene, onto which the metals Cr, Ti, Pd, Ni, Al, and Au atoms had been deposited, was carried out in an aberration-corrected scanning transmission electron microscope. In combination with electron energy loss spectroscopy, employed to identify individual impurity atoms, it was shown that nanoscale holes were etched into graphene, initiated at sites where single atoms of all the metal species except for gold come into close contact with the graphene. The e-beam scanning process is instrumental in promoting metal atoms from clusters formed during the original metal deposition process onto the clean graphene surface, where they initiate the hole-forming process. Our observations are discussed in the light of calculations in the literature, predicting a much lowered vacancy formation in graphene when metal ad-atoms are present. The requirement and importance of oxygen atoms in this process, although not predicted by such previous calculations, is also discussed, following our observations of hole formation in pristine graphene in the presence of Si-impurity atoms, supported by new calculations which predict a dramatic decrease of the vacancy formation energy, when SiOx molecules are present.
-------------------------------------

10011924_234 - 0.757474570869 - science
[gastric, expression, prognostic, adenocarcinoma, hypoxia-inducible, tumour, gastro-oesophageal, factor, factor-1alpha, intestinal]

Hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha expression in the gastric carcinogenesis sequence and its prognostic role in gastric and gastro-oesophageal adenocarcinomas.
Hypoxia-inducible factor-1 (HIF-1)alpha expression was studied in the gastric carcinogenesis sequence and as a prognostic factor in surgically resected gastric and gastro-oesophageal junction tumours. Protein expression was examined using immunohistochemistry on formalin-fixed biopsies of normal mucosa (n=20), Helicobacter pylori associated gastritis (n=24), intestinal metaplasia (n=24), dysplasia (n=12) and intestinal (n=19) and diffuse (n=21) adenocarcinoma. The relationship between HIF-1alpha expression and prognosis was assessed in resection specimens from 177 patients with gastric and gastro-oesophageal junction adenocarcinoma. Hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha expression was not observed in normal gastric mucosa but increased in density (P<0.01) and intensity (P<0.01) with progression from H. pylori-associated gastritis, intestinal metaplasia, dysplasia to adenocarcinoma. The pattern of staining in the resection specimens was focally positive in 49 (28%) and at the invasive tumour edge in 41 (23%). Invasive edge expression was associated with lymph node metastases (P=0.034), advanced TNM stage (P=0.001) and was an adverse prognostic factor for cancer-specific survival (P=0.019). In univariate analysis and in comparison with tumours not expressing HIF-1alpha, invasive edge staining was associated with a hazard ratio of 1.6 (95% CI 1.0-2.5) and focally positive staining a hazard ratio of 0.7 (95% CI 0.5-1.2). Hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha lost prognostic significance in multivariate analysis. The results suggest HIF-1alpha is involved in gastric carcinogenesis and disease progression, but is only a weak prognostic factor for survival.
-------------------------------------

10008907_234 - 0.833115846162 - science
[dose, tumor, survivin, ly2181308, study, patient, aso, tissue, expression]

Tumor survivin is downregulated by the antisense oligonucleotide LY2181308: a proof-of-concept, first-in-human dose study.
PURPOSE: Enhanced tumor cell survival through expression of inhibitors of apoptosis (IAP) is a hallmark of cancer. Survivin, an IAP absent from most normal tissues, is overexpressed in many malignancies and associated with a poorer prognosis. We report the first-in-human dose study of LY2181308, a second-generation antisense oligonucleotide (ASO) directed against survivin mRNA. Patients and Methods: A dose-escalation study evaluating the safety, pharmacokinetics, and pharmacodynamics of LY2181308 administered intravenously for 3 hours as a loading dose on 3 consecutive days and followed by weekly maintenance doses. Patients were eligible after signing informed consent, had exhausted approved anticancer therapies and agreed to undergo pre- and posttreatment tumor biopsies to evaluate reduction of survivin protein and gene expression. RESULTS: A total of 40 patients were treated with LY2181308 at doses of 100 to 1,000 mg. Twenty-six patients were evaluated at the recommended phase 2 dose of 750 mg, at which level serial tumor sampling and (11)CLY2183108 PET (positron emission tomography) imaging demonstrated that ASO accumulated within tumor tissue, reduced survivin gene and protein expression by 20% and restored apoptotic signaling in tumor cells in vivo. Pharmacokinetics were consistent with preclinical modeling, exhibiting rapid tissue distribution, and terminal half-life of 31 days. CONCLUSIONS: The tumor-specific, molecularly targeted effects demonstrated by this ASO in man underpin confirmatory studies evaluating its therapeutic efficacy in cancer.
-------------------------------------

10011709_234 - 0.923201516806 - science
[aptamer, heparanase, enzyme, tumour, assay, cell, hpse1]

Development of novel single-stranded nucleic acid aptamers against the pro-angiogenic and metastatic enzyme heparanase (HPSE1).
Heparanase is an enzyme involved in extracellular matrix remodelling and heparan sulphate proteoglycan catabolism. It is secreted by metastatic tumour cells, allowing them to penetrate the endothelial cell layer and basement membrane to invade target organs. The release of growth factors at the site of cleaved heparan sulphate chains further enhance the potential of the tumour by encouraging the process of angiogenesis. This leads to increased survival and further proliferation of the tumour. Aptamers are single or double stranded oligonucleotides that recognise specific small molecules, peptides, proteins, or even cells or tissues and have shown great potential over the years as diagnostic and therapeutic agents in anticancer treatment. For the first time, single stranded DNA aptamers were successfully generated against the active heterodimer form of heparanase using a modified SELEX protocol, and eluted based on increasing affinity for the target. Sandwich ELISA assays showed recognition of heparanase by the aptamers at a site distinct from that of a polyclonal HPSE1 antibody. The binding affinities of aptamer to immobilised enzyme were high (7 × 10(7) to 8 × 10(7) M(-1)) as measured by fluorescence spectroscopy. Immunohistochemistry and immunofluorescence studies demonstrated that the aptamers were able to recognise heparanase with staining comparable or in some cases superior to that of the HPSE1 antibody control. Finally, matrigel assay demonstrated that aptamers were able to inhibit heparanase. This study provides clear proof of principle concept that nucleic acid aptamers can be generated against heparanase. These reagents may serve as useful tools to explore the functional role of the enzyme and in the future development of diagnostic assays or therapeutic reagents.
-------------------------------------

10007024_234 - 0.931050426402 - science
[urea, chemistry, substrate]

The urea renaissance.
Over the last decade the use of urea derivatives as useful reagents, catalysts, and structural features in organic chemistry has increased rapidly. They now find utility as hydrogen-bond donors in organocatalysts and anion transporters, as important scaffolds in supramolecular chemistry, as lithiation directors, amination substrates, and promoters of metalation, and as substrates for novel rearrangement reactions. Highlighted herein is the remarkably rapid and recent development of the chemistry of ureas, which for many years had been considered unreactive, intractable, and of little value.
-------------------------------------

10009712_234 - 0.7738997752 - science
[method, fungal, detection, diagnostic, technique, mould, disease, drug, invasive, antifungal]

Detection and investigation of invasive mould disease.
A comprehensive review of diagnostic techniques for opportunistic systemic mycoses focused on invasive mould disease in immunocompromised patients is presented. We first analysed conventional diagnostic methods, such as microscopy examination, culture and radiology, underlining their limitations, which have led to the development of alternative methods, such as the detection of fungal components. Among these we highlight fungal antigen and DNA quantification, which make it possible to detect infections early and start appropriate treatment. We also briefly review the methods for carrying out susceptibility tests for antifungal drugs, including reference procedures, commercial techniques and their indications. Furthermore, we analyse the recommendations for therapeutic drug monitoring of antifungal agents in body fluids.
-------------------------------------

10017919_234 - 0.817920274652 - science
[ssr, sunscreen, fibrillin, fibronectin, flat-spectrum, microfibril, damage, structure, radiation, sample]

Flat spectrum sun screen protects against ultraviolet radiation induced damage to key extracellular matrix components in vitro
Ultraviolet radiation has profound effects on the structure and function of extracellular matrix components. We have previously demonstrated that molecules rich in amino acid UV-chromophores (fibrillin and fibronectin), are susceptible to physiological doses of solar simulated radiation (SSR). In the current study we have investigated whether a flat-spectrum sunscreen (similar absorbance at all wavelengths) is capable of protecting fibrillin and fibronectin from degradation by SSR. Suspensions of fibronectin and fibrillin microfibrils derived from photoprotected human dermis were exposed to a single dose of SSR (290-400nm; 23.7J/cm2): i) in the absence of any protection (SSR); ii) covered by a quartz plate coated with vehicle (1mg/cm2; SSR+V); iii) covered by a quartz plate coated with a flat-spectrum sunscreen (1mg/cm2; SSR+SS) (n=3). The effect of SSR on molecular structure was determined by atomic force microscopy (fibrillin) and native PAGE (fibronectin). Following irradiation, fibrillin microfibril structure underwent profound remodelling in SSR and SSR+V samples which was partially prevented by the flat-spectrum sunscreen. Microfibril periodicity in the unexposed sample was unimodally distributed (centred at 55.4nm). However, irradiation (in the absence of sunscreen) abolished this single population (bimodal with peaks centred at 45.3 and 66.1nm). In SSR+SS samples, this molecular remodelling was partially prevented (bimodal with peaks at 51.9 and 65nm). SSR exposure induced significant aggregation of fibronectin (p=0.005), which was abrogated by the flat-spectrum sunscreen (p=0.033) but not the vehicle control (p=0.754). We conclude that a flat spectrum sunscreen can reduce direct UV-mediated damage of key dermal molecules and thereby in part prevent UV-induced skin damage.
-------------------------------------

10008188_234 - 0.734387397679 - science
[chemical, respiratory, test, allergen, identification, potential, sensitization]

Inter-relationships between different classes of chemical allergens.
Although allergic sensitization of the respiratory tract induced by chemicals is not as common as skin sensitization, it is nevertheless an important occupational health issue. Respiratory allergy to chemicals, characterized typically by rhinitis and asthma, is associated with considerable morbidity and with related socioeconomic costs. Several experimental approaches have been proposed for the prospective identification of chemical respiratory allergens, but none of these has yet been validated formally. In the absence of a widely accepted method for respiratory allergen identification, it is appropriate and relevant to explore their relationship with skin-sensitizing chemicals. A series of chemicals known to cause immune-mediated respiratory allergy in humans has been examined. The majority of the respiratory allergens tested were found to elicit positive responses in one or more standard tests used for the identification of skin-sensitizing potential (guinea pig maximization test, the Buehler test and/or the local lymph node assay). We suggest that this observation might form the basis of a potentially useful paradigm for initial characterization of the respiratory-sensitizing potential of chemicals. Specifically, chemicals that fail to elicit positive responses in accepted skin-sensitization test methods might also be regarded as lacking the inherent potential to cause allergic sensitization of the respiratory tract. Copyright © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
-------------------------------------

10018410_234 - 0.849478880912 - science
[il-1, mouse, inflammation, diet, atherosclerosis, systemic, paigen, brain, western, cerebrovascular]

Interleukin-1 mediates neuroinflammatory changes associated with diet-induced atherosclerosis.
BACKGROUND: Systemic inflammation contributes to brain pathology in cerebrovascular disease through mechanisms that are poorly understood. METHODS AND RESULTS: Here we show that atherosclerosis, a major systemic inflammatory disease, is associated with severe cerebrovascular inflammation in mice and that this effect is mediated by the proinflammatory cytokine interleukin-1 (IL-1). Apolipoprotein E-deficient mice fed Paigen or Western diets develop vascular inflammation, microglial activation, and leukocyte recruitment in the brain, which are absent in apolipoprotein E-deficient mice crossed with IL-1 type 1 receptor-deficient mice. Systemic neutralization of IL-1β with an anti-IL-1β antibody reversed aortic plaque formation (by 34% after a Paigen and 45% after a Western diet) and reduced inflammatory cytokine expression in peripheral organs. Central, lipid accumulation-associated leukocyte infiltration into the choroid plexus was reversed by IL-1β antibody administration. Animals fed a Western diet showed 57% lower vascular inflammation in the brain than that of mice fed a Paigen diet, and this was reduced further by 24% after IL-1β antibody administration. CONCLUSIONS: These results indicate that IL-1 is a key driver of systemically mediated cerebrovascular inflammation and that interventions against IL-1β could be therapeutically useful in atherosclerosis, dementia, or stroke. (J Am Heart Assoc. 2012;1:e002006 doi: 10.1161/JAHA.112.002006.).
-------------------------------------

10004211_234 - 0.847757595237 - medicine
[child, vh, cardiac, ventricular, chus, echocardiography, diagnosis, dimension, score]

The association of cardiac ventricular hypertrophy with Congenital Hyperinsulinism (CHI).
ABSTRACT: Objective: Ventricular hypertrophy (VH) has been observed in children with Congenital Hyperinsulinism (CHI), a condition of hypoglycaemia characterised by dysregulated insulin secretion, but the prevalence is not known. PATIENTS AND METHODS: Cardiac assessment was performed in children (n=49) with CHI at diagnosis and follow-up. Two dimensional and Doppler echocardiography studies were used to assess cardiac structures, while M-mode study was used to measure left ventricular (LV) dimensions, subsequently converted to Z scores. Where possible, LVH was confirmed by LV mass index (LVMI, g/m2.7) > 95th centile. RESULTS: Cardiac structural lesions were found in 14 (28%) children. At initial echocardiography, VH was present in 31 (65%) children with median (range) left ventricular posterior wall dimension in diastole (LVPWd) Z scores of + 1.6 (-2.4 to +5.8) and interventricular septal dimension in diastole (IVSd) Z scores of +1.9 (-1.7 to +17.2). At follow up echocardiography, performed after an interval of 178 (45 to 390) days, VH persisted in 16 (33%) children. In regression analysis, the presence of VH odds ratio (95% confidence intervals (CI)) 1.1 (1.0 to 1.2), p=0.04 at initial echocardiography was correlated with maximum glucose requirement at diagnosis, indicating that severity of CHI at presentation may play a role in the pathogenesis of VH. CONCLUSIONS: A significant proportion of children with CHI have cardiac structural lesions. A majority also have VH, which may be associated with the severity of CHI at diagnosis. VH may persist in some children, which requires careful long term cardiac review.Word count 245.
-------------------------------------

10003575_234 - 0.85368350217 - science
[gene, mutant, mutation]

Replacement of Streptomyces hygroscopicus genomic segments with in vitro altered DNA sequences
We have developed a method for gene replacement in Streptomyces hygroscopicus which permits introduction of an in vitro derived mutation carried on a plasmid into the chromosome. We constructed the plasmid pMSB212 which can replicate in S. hygroscopicus and contains the step5 gene of the bialaphos biosynthetic pathway which was inactivated by a frame-shift mutation caused by filling in the cohesive ends of the EcoR I site in the structural gene. pMSB212 was introduced into a bialaphos producer strain and by protoplast regeneration of the primary thiostrepton-resistant transformants, non-producing mutants, were obtained. Biochemical and genetical analyses indicated that these mutants were specifically blocked by introduction of the frame-shift mutation in the step5 gene on the chromosome. This method will enable us to obtain isogenic mutants of known genes and to identify new genes encoded on a cloned fragment.
-------------------------------------

10005621_234 - 0.76013804681 - medicine
[irritable, syndrome, bowel, abdominal, distension]

Abdominal distension in female patients with irritable bowel syndrome: exploration of possible mechanisms.
Abdominal distension is a common but little understood symptom of the irritable bowel syndrome. The authenticity of the symptom was confirmed by appreciable increases in girth measurement during the day in 20 patients with the irritable bowel syndrome compared with 20 control subjects. Objective corroboration of this finding was shown in the group with the irritable bowel syndrome by a highly significant increase in lateral abdominal 'profile' on computed tomography. Previously postulated mechanisms for distension--namely, retention of gas, depression of the diaphragm, and excess lumbar lordosis--were excluded by the radiological findings. Voluntary protrusion of the abdomen produced a completely different pattern on computed tomography to that observed in the irritable bowel syndrome. These observations suggest that abdominal distension may be related to changes in motility or tone of gastrointestinal smooth muscle.
-------------------------------------

10018324_234 - 0.896850349772 - science
[cell, cd8, eosinophilia, mouse, lung, cd4, th2-driven, rsv]

CD8+ T cells control Th2-driven pathology during pulmonary respiratory syncytial virus infection.
BALB/c mice vaccinated with vaccinia virus expressing the major surface glycoprotein G of respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) develop lung eosinophilia during RSV challenge. The G protein is remarkable in that it induces CD4+, but no CD8+ T cells in this mouse strain. Studies using passive T cell transfers show that co-injection of CD8+ T cells greatly reduces the Th2-driven lung eosinophilia caused by G-specific CD4+ T cells. By contrast, vaccination with the fusion protein (F) induces both CD8+ and CD4+ T cells, but not lung eosinophilia during RSV infection. These observations suggest that CD8+ T cells play a crucial role in preventing Th2-driven pathology. We therefore depleted mice with anti-CD8 antibodies in vivo. This treatment allowed lung eosinophilia to develop in F-primed mice. Depletion of interferon (IFN)-gamma had a similar effect, suggesting that secretion of this cytokine is the mechanism by which CD8+ T cells exert their effect. To test whether similar effects occurred in other strains of mice, RSV-infected C57BL/6 mice (which do not develop eosinophilia after sensitization to G) were treated with anti-IFN-gamma. Again, these mice developed eosinophilia. In this strain, genetic deletion of CD8-alpha, beta2-microglobulin or genes coding for the transporter associated with antigen presentation (which in each case eliminates CD8+ T cells) caused lung eosinophilia during RSV infection. These studies show the critical roles that CD8+ T cells and IFN-gamma production play in regulating Th2-driven eosinophilia and provide a unifying explanation for previous studies of lung eosinophilia. We propose that vaccines designed to enhance CD8+ T cell recognition might avoid disease caused by CD4+ Th2 cells.
-------------------------------------

10009956_234 - 0.863754232185 - science
[strain, cmc, concentration, method]

In-vitro resistance to imidazole antifungals in Candida albicans.
Three strains of Candida albicans from patients with chronic mucocutaneous candidosis (CMC) who relapsed during prolonged treatment with ketoconazole were compared with three other Can. albicans strains by means of an agar incorporation MIC method, a broth microdilution method for IC30 determination, and a hyphal elongation assessment method. The MICs of ketoconazole, tioconazole and miconazole were difficult to interpret, but were much higher for the three CMC strains if low inoculum concentrations and short incubation times were used. The IC30S of the three imidazoles were much higher for the CMC strains than for the others. The imidazoles all caused minimal inhibition of hyphal elongation by the three CMC strains at concentrations up to 50 mg/l. Concentrations of 0.5 mg/l caused marked inhibition of the other strains.
-------------------------------------

10011091_234 - 0.943493300356 - science
[so4, calcite, role, aragonite, sea, switch]

The role of SO4 in the switch from calcite to aragonite seas
cited By (since 1996) 8
-------------------------------------

10004328_234 - 0.826708126059 - technology_and_computing
[engine, visualization, model, fault, implicit, technique, discrete, physics, surface, numerical]

Numerical Modelling and Visualization of the Evolution of Extensional Fault Systems
The purpose of this work is split into two categories, the first was to analyse the application of real-time Physics Engine software libraries for use in calculating a geological numerical model. Second was the analysis of the applicability of glyph and implicit surface based visualization techniques to explore fault systems produced by the model. The current state of the art in Physics Engines was explored by redeveloping a Discrete Element Model to be calculated using NVIDIA’s PhysX engine. Analyses regarding the suitability of the engine in terms of numerical accuracy and developmental capabilities is given, as well as the definition of a specialised and bespoke parallelisation technique. The use of various glyph based visualizations is explored to define a new standardised taxonomy for geological data and the MetaBall visualization technique was applied to reveal three dimensional fault structures as an implicit surface. Qualitative analysis was undertaken in the form of a user study, comprising of interviews with expert geologists. The processing pipeline used by many Physics Engines was found to be comparable to the design of Discrete Element Model software, however, aspects of their design, such as integration accuracy, limitation to single precision floating point and imposed limits on the scale of n-body problem means their suitability is restricted to specific modelling cases. Glyph and implicit surface based visualization have been shown to be an effective way to present a geological Discrete Element Model, with the majority of experts interviewed able to perceive the fault structures that it contained. Development of a new engine, or modification of one that exists in accordance with the findings of this thesis would result in a library extremely well suited to the problem of rigid-body simulation for the sciences.
-------------------------------------

10009814_234 - 0.917873562615 - science
[cilofungin, intracellular, blastospore, neutrophil, killing, amphotericin, 5-fluorocytosine, albican, candida, presence]

Effect of cilofungin on phagocytosis and intracellular killing of Candida albicans by human neutrophils.
The effect of a beta glucan synthase inhibitor, cilofungin, amphotericin B and 5-fluorocytosine on opsonization, phagocytosis and intracellular killing of Candida albicans blastospores by glass-adherent human neutrophils was determined by microscopy and dye exclusion staining. Pretreatment of blastospores for 2, 4, 6 and 18 h with 1.25 mg/l cilofungin resulted in 24-28% of neutrophils ingesting compared to 24% with no drug present. There was no significant difference in the phagocytic index with increased incubation time. Percentage ingestion and phagocytic index values were not significantly different when blastospores were pretreated for 2 h in the presence of 3, 7, 15, 31 and 62 mg/l cilofungin. Comparable concentrations of amphotericin B and 5-fluorocytosine gave similar results. In the absence of cilofungin, intracellular killing after 2 h was 54%. In the presence of 1 and 10 mg/l cilofungin, 85-90% of intracellular blastospores were killed. Therapeutic levels of amphotericin B or 5-fluorocytosine did not enhance intracellular killing. These data demonstrate the potentiation of intracellular killing of Candida albicans by neutrophils in the presence of cilofungin.
-------------------------------------

10015083_234 - 0.848393870414 - science
[biological, linear, pca, model, microarray, interpretation]

Biologically valid linear factor models of gene expressions
Motivation: The identification of physiological processes underlying and generating the expression pattern observed in microarray experiments is a major challenge. Principal component analysis (PCA) is a linear multivariate statistical method that is regularly employed for that purpose as it provides a reduced-dimensional representation for subsequent study of possible biological processes responding to the particular experimental conditions. Making explicit the data assumptions underlying PCA highlights their lack of biological validity thus making biological interpretation of the principal components problematic. A microarray data representation which enables clear biological interpretation is a desirable analysis tool. Results: We address this issue by employing the probabilistic interpretation of PCA and proposing alternative linear factor models which are based on refined biological assumptions. A practical study on two well-understood microarray datasets highlights the weakness of PCA and the greater biological interpretability of the linear models we have developed. ?? Oxford University Press 2004; all rights reserved.
-------------------------------------

10009397_234 - 0.780280483911 - society
[society]

Free trade nation : commerce, consumption, and civil society in modern Britain
There are several extracts from reviews at the publisher's website: Winner of the Whitfield Prize of the Royal Historical Society http://www.oup.com/us/catalog/general/subject/HistoryOther/EconomicHistory/?view=usa&ci=9780199567324 Accessed 12/10/2012 cmd
-------------------------------------

10010942_234 - 0.752403253264 - science
[autophagy, guideline, assay, autophagosome, process]

Guidelines for the use and interpretation of assays for monitoring autophagy.
In 2008 we published the first set of guidelines for standardizing research in autophagy. Since then, research on this topic has continued to accelerate, and many new scientists have entered the field. Our knowledge base and relevant new technologies have also been expanding. Accordingly, it is important to update these guidelines for monitoring autophagy in different organisms. Various reviews have described the range of assays that have been used for this purpose. Nevertheless, there continues to be confusion regarding acceptable methods to measure autophagy, especially in multicellular eukaryotes. A key point that needs to be emphasized is that there is a difference between measurements that monitor the numbers or volume of autophagic elements (e.g., autophagosomes or autolysosomes) at any stage of the autophagic process vs. those that measure flux through the autophagy pathway (i.e., the complete process); thus, a block in macroautophagy that results in autophagosome accumulation needs to be differentiated from stimuli that result in increased autophagic activity, defined as increased autophagy induction coupled with increased delivery to, and degradation within, lysosomes (in most higher eukaryotes and some protists such as Dictyostelium) or the vacuole (in plants and fungi). In other words, it is especially important that investigators new to the field understand that the appearance of more autophagosomes does not necessarily equate with more autophagy. In fact, in many cases, autophagosomes accumulate because of a block in trafficking to lysosomes without a concomitant change in autophagosome biogenesis, whereas an increase in autolysosomes may reflect a reduction in degradative activity. Here, we present a set of guidelines for the selection and interpretation of methods for use by investigators who aim to examine macroautophagy and related processes, as well as for reviewers who need to provide realistic and reasonable critiques of papers that are focused on these processes. These guidelines are not meant to be a formulaic set of rules, because the appropriate assays depend in part on the question being asked and the system being used. In addition, we emphasize that no individual assay is guaranteed to be the most appropriate one in every situation, and we strongly recommend the use of multiple assays to monitor autophagy. In these guidelines, we consider these various methods of assessing autophagy and what information can, or cannot, be obtained from them. Finally, by discussing the merits and limits of particular autophagy assays, we hope to encourage technical innovation in the field.
-------------------------------------

10005364_234 - 0.8235151306 - science
[electrode, measurement, impedance]

Capacitively-Coupled Impedance Measurements for ERT
The paper explores the potential for using capacitively-coupled electrodes in electrical resistance tomography. Such electrodes are less vulnerable to corrosion and electrochemical effects that plague conventional electrical resistance tomographs utilising electrodes that are in intimate contact with the material. A model is proposed that takes account of the complex impedance of the insulating layer. The performance of the resulting passive network of components has been simulated up to 1 MHz excitation frequency. 2D finite element modelling has been used to explore the measurements that might be expected from electrodes distributed around the boundary of a vessel. Except for the adjacent measurements the modelled impedances are within 1% of those for conventional electrodes.
-------------------------------------

10004069_234 - 0.968936488391 - food_and_drink
[food, meal, habit, socio-cultural, cultural]

A Cultural Ecological Approach for Meal Security A Case Study of the Dynamics of the Food Habits in El Obeid, Sudan
Worldwide more food than ever is produced these days. It would be enough to feed everybody by far. However, only a limited group of the global population enjoys an adequate food supply. About 854 million people are undernourished worldwide. The global situation shows that hunger cannot be fought by just producing enough food. The socio-cultural complex of nutrition and food habits cannot be reduced to the production and marketing of crops. To fight the problem of lacking food security, ecological and socio-cultural conditions have to be taken into account.This research focuses on the questions of ‘what is food’ and ‘why is certain food eaten in a specific way’ as prerequisites to understand the problem of malnutrition and food shortage as well as to fight food insecurity. Humans could eat anything that is digestible and not poisonous. However, they do not do so. Even though all human beings share the need to provide enough energy and nutrients for their metabolic functions, they do not think of the energy or nutrient content of food when they eat. Food is eaten according to certain social and cultural norms and meanings. Food usually is not consumed as grown or found in nature. Through technologies, skills, and knowledge the raw matter is transformed into a meal and eaten in a way according to given socio-cultural norms. People eat a culturally bound meal which satisfies not only their dietary needs but culinary desires. Food habits are a result of the interaction between different natural and cultural factors and the ability of the individual to interact with both these spheres. Therefore, this research analyses the complexity of food habits, their dynamics, and how the food culture of a society interacts with the natural and socio-cultural environment. According to this, a cultural ecological concept of food culture - the cycle of meal - is introduced. It focuses on the interdependence and interactions of food habits within the natural and cultural environment. Moreover, the concept emphasises the importance of meal preparation as essential procedure of transforming natural raw matters into culturally bound products and as fundamental element to reach not only food but meal security. This study bases on research conducted in the town El Obeid in Central Sudan, which is located in the remote and famine-prone environment of North Kordofan. The case study shows that food shortage can only be understood and fought if food culture is considered as a central element of meal security. Therefore, the research is based on the examination of food habits, their dynamics, and interactions within the socio-cultural context.
-------------------------------------

10007480_234 - 0.711253369658 - science
[ctc, patient, cell, epithelial, iset, tumour, cellsearch, pancreatic, biomarker]

A pilot study to explore circulating tumour cells in pancreatic cancer as a novel biomarker.
BACKGROUND: Obtaining tissue for pancreatic carcinoma diagnosis and biomarker assessment to aid drug development is challenging. Circulating tumour cells (CTCs) may represent a potential biomarker to address these unmet needs. We compared prospectively the utility of two platforms for CTC enumeration and characterisation in pancreatic cancer patients in a pilot exploratory study. PATIENTS AND METHODS: Blood samples were obtained prospectively from 54 consenting patients and analysed by CellSearch and isolation by size of epithelial tumour cells (ISET). CellSearch exploits immunomagnetic capture of CTCs-expressing epithelial markers, whereas ISET is a marker independent, blood filtration device. Circulating tumour cell expression of epithelial and mesenchymal markers was assessed to explore any discrepancy in CTC number between the two platforms. RESULTS: ISET detected CTCs in more patients than CellSearch (93% vs 40%) and in higher numbers (median CTCs/7.5 ml, 9 (range 0-240) vs 0 (range 0-144)). Heterogeneity observed for epithelial cell adhesion molecule, pan-cytokeratin (CK), E-Cadherin, Vimentin and CK 7 expression in CTCs may account for discrepancy in CTC number between platforms. CONCLUSION: ISET detects more CTCs than CellSearch and offers flexible CTC characterisation with potential to investigate CTC biology and develop biomarkers for pancreatic cancer patient management.
-------------------------------------

10007781_234 - 0.867958229279 - science
[tumour, technique, imaging, metabolic]

Metabolic and molecular imaging in neuro-oncology.
Techniques for human brain imaging have undergone rapid developments in recent years. Technological progress has enabled the assessment of many physiological parameters in vivo that are highly relevant for tumour grading, tissue characterisation, definition of the extent and infiltration of tumours, and planning and monitoring of therapy. In this review, we provide a brief overview of advanced MRI and molecular-tracer techniques that have many potential clinical uses. A broad range of techniques, including dynamic MRI, PET, and single photon emission computed tomography, provide measurements of various features of tumour blood flow and microvasculature. Using PET to measure glucose consumption enables visualisation of tumour metabolism, and magnetic resonance spectroscopy techniques provide complementary information on energy metabolism. Changes in protein and DNA synthesis can be assessed through uptake of labelled amino acids and nucleosides. Advanced imaging techniques can be used to assess tumour malignancy, extent, and infiltration, and might provide diagnostic clues to distinguish between lesion types and between recurrent tumour and necrosis. Stereotactic biopsies should be taken from the most malignant part of tumours, which can be identified by changes in microvascular structure and metabolic activity. Functional and metabolic imaging can improve the planning and monitoring of radiation and chemotherapy and contribute to the development of new therapies.
-------------------------------------

10017043_234 - 0.827393618419 - medicine
[depression, treatment, prevention, surgery, hip, score, study, intervention, nurse-led, tau]

Treatment and prevention of depression after surgery for hip fracture in older people: cost-effectiveness analysis.
OBJECTIVE: For older people who have had hip fracture surgery, to evaluate the cost-effectiveness of a nurse-led intervention in treating depression compared to treatment as usual (TAU), and to evaluate the cost-effectiveness of a psychological treatment for the prevention of depression. DESIGN: Two linked cost-effectiveness studies for the treatment and prevention of depression after hip surgery, from the perspective of health, social care, voluntary sector agencies and unpaid carers. SETTING: Orthopaedic units in Manchester, England. PARTICIPANTS: One hundred and twenty-one patients with Geriatric Depression Scale (GDS) scores greater than 6 were included in the treatment study and 172 patients with GDS scores less than or equal to 6 were enrolled in the prevention study. INTERVENTIONS: Nurse-led intervention for treating depression versus TAU; and cognitive behaviour therapy (CBT) for preventing depression following surgery for hip fracture. MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Outcomes were changes in HADS-depression scores at 6 weeks. Costs covered treatment and all service impacts. RESULTS: After 6 weeks, there were no significant differences in cost. However, the nurse-led intervention group had a lower mean HADS-depression score compared to TAU. In the prevention study, there were no significant differences in cost and depression score between patients treated with CBT and TAU. CONCLUSION: The results for this parallel randomized controlled study show that after hip fracture surgery a nurse-led intervention may be a cost-effective option for the treatment of depression in older people with depression. However CBT does not appear to be a cost-effective option for the prevention of depression in this population.
-------------------------------------

10017158_234 - 0.966772068325 - education
[student, school, behaviour, teacher, area]

Using The Views Of Marginalised Students About Effective Teaching
Schools often find problem behaviour difficult to address due to an overabundance of research and methods in this area.  For a variety of reasons, wavering on this matter is based on multiple reform initiatives that compete and intersect.  A solution to this indecisiveness finds a high proportion of adolescents, who are considered to be deviant by their teachers, excluded from mainstream classes and placed in alternative learning environments. These placements promise academic intervention, but tend to only address issues of self‐esteem through behaviour modification.  As a result, these students remain in a skills‐deficit position that threatens their self‐esteem and provokes their original deviance.  The study reported in this thesis considers this issue and its relationship to student voice.  In so doing, it challenges exclusion as a way of addressing negative behaviour by looking at school experiences from the perspectives of students considered to be deviant to discover and examine the common places where they have found success.Bearing this argument in mind, this one-year study set out to find areas in a school in the United States that students labeled with a behaviour difficulty might identify as positive learning environments. The specific focus was designing and implementing a methodology that used action research to more accurately identify literature to address the specific needs and concerns of the students under scrutiny. It used school tours to help participants identify areas of success, as a basis for interviews, and as a direction for teacher observations. The voices of these marginalized students produced common categories that identified possible paths to reform. They were able to identify several successful components of lesson planning and general concerns that challenged the school’s culture. The implications of these findings are a significant step forward to what we know about the workings of inclusive classrooms, the teachers who find success in them, and how students come to be labeled with a behaviour difficulty.
-------------------------------------

10014433_234 - 0.849921238486 - science
[hsd17b7, reductase, cholesterol, 3-ketosteroid, biosynthesis, protein]

Closing the gap: Identification of human 3-ketosteroid reductase, the last unknown enzyme of mammalian cholesterol biosynthesis
The protein encoded by the HSD17B7 gene was originally described as a prolactin receptor-associated protein and as 17??-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase (HSD) type 7. Its ability to synthesize 17??-estradiol in vitro has been reported previously. However, we demonstrate that HSD17B7 is the ortholog of the yeast 3-ketosteroid reductase Erg27p and converts zymosterone to zymosterol in vitro, using reduced nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate as cofactor. Expression of human and murine HSD17B7 in an Erg27p-deficient yeast strain complements the 3-ketosteroid reductase deficiency of the cells and restores growth on sterol-deficient medium. A fusion of HSD17B7 with green fluorescent protein is located in the endoplasmic reticulum, the site of postsqualene cholesterogenesis. Further critical evidence for a role of HSD17B7 in cholesterol metabolism is provided by the observation that its murine ortholog is a member of the same highly distinct embryonic synexpression group as hydroxymethyl-glutaryl-coenzyme A reductase, the rate-limiting enzyme of sterol biogenesis, and is specifically expressed in tissues that are involved in the pathogenesis of congenital cholesterol-deficiency disorders. We conclude that HSD17B7 participates in postsqualene cholesterol biosynthesis, thus completing the molecular cloning of all genes of this central metabolic pathway. In its function as the 3-ketosteroid reductase of cholesterol biosynthesis, HSD17B7 is a novel candidate for inborn errors of cholesterol metabolism.
-------------------------------------

10005278_234 - 0.811459318574 - science
[scar, score, stimulation, electrical, pain]

Treatment of symptomatic abnormal skin scars with electrical stimulation.
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the effect of non-invasive biofeedback electrical stimulation on symptomatic abnormal skin scars. METHOD: Thirty patients with over 140 scars with long-term pain and itch were recruited into the study. Patients monitored the intensity of symptoms (pain and itching) on a numerical rating scale. In addition, a modified Manchester scar scale was used to objectively assess digital photographs of each scar in terms of colour, contour, distortion and texture, while a non-invasive spectrophotometric intracutaneous analysis was used to monitor the scars' physical characteristics. RESULTS: The electrical stimulation device resulted in a clinically and statistically significant (p < 0.05) reduction of symptoms and scar scores. Pain and itch scores were both reduced to a median score of 0 by 2 months, from a baseline of 7 and 6 respectively. Scar scores were reduced from a baseline of 14 to a median score of 11 by 2 months. CONCLUSION: These results give a preliminary indication of the potential role of non-invasive biofeedback electrical stimulation in the management of chronic scar pain and itch. However, further large scale controlled studies are warranted to elucidate its overall efficacy and mechanistic action. CONFLICT OF INTEREST: Funding was provided from Fenzian Ltd for this study.
-------------------------------------

10008046_234 - 0.914084266445 - science
[locus, sphingolipid, phospholipid, agpat1, phospho, pld2, pdxdc1, apoe, novel, study]

Genome-wide association study identifies novel loci associated with circulating phospho- and sphingolipid concentrations.
Phospho- and sphingolipids are crucial cellular and intracellular compounds. These lipids are required for active transport, a number of enzymatic processes, membrane formation, and cell signalling. Disruption of their metabolism leads to several diseases, with diverse neurological, psychiatric, and metabolic consequences. A large number of phospholipid and sphingolipid species can be detected and measured in human plasma. We conducted a meta-analysis of five European family-based genome-wide association studies (N = 4034) on plasma levels of 24 sphingomyelins (SPM), 9 ceramides (CER), 57 phosphatidylcholines (PC), 20 lysophosphatidylcholines (LPC), 27 phosphatidylethanolamines (PE), and 16 PE-based plasmalogens (PLPE), as well as their proportions in each major class. This effort yielded 25 genome-wide significant loci for phospholipids (smallest P-value = 9.88×10(-204)) and 10 loci for sphingolipids (smallest P-value = 3.10×10(-57)). After a correction for multiple comparisons (P-value<2.2×10(-9)), we observed four novel loci significantly associated with phospholipids (PAQR9, AGPAT1, PKD2L1, PDXDC1) and two with sphingolipids (PLD2 and APOE) explaining up to 3.1% of the variance. Further analysis of the top findings with respect to within class molar proportions uncovered three additional loci for phospholipids (PNLIPRP2, PCDH20, and ABDH3) suggesting their involvement in either fatty acid elongation/saturation processes or fatty acid specific turnover mechanisms. Among those, 14 loci (KCNH7, AGPAT1, PNLIPRP2, SYT9, FADS1-2-3, DLG2, APOA1, ELOVL2, CDK17, LIPC, PDXDC1, PLD2, LASS4, and APOE) mapped into the glycerophospholipid and 12 loci (ILKAP, ITGA9, AGPAT1, FADS1-2-3, APOA1, PCDH20, LIPC, PDXDC1, SGPP1, APOE, LASS4, and PLD2) to the sphingolipid pathways. In large meta-analyses, associations between FADS1-2-3 and carotid intima media thickness, AGPAT1 and type 2 diabetes, and APOA1 and coronary artery disease were observed. In conclusion, our study identified nine novel phospho- and sphingolipid loci, substantially increasing our knowledge of the genetic basis for these traits.
-------------------------------------

10018194_234 - 0.821477983702 - science
[nlrp3, inflammasome, cell, mechanism, activation, volume, regulation, osmolarity]

Cell volume regulation modulates NLRP3 inflammasome activation
Cell volume regulation is a primitive response to alterations in environmental osmolarity. The NLRP3 inflammasome is a multiprotein complex that senses pathogen- and danger-associated signals. Here, we report that, from fish to mammals, the basic mechanisms of cell swelling and regulatory volume decrease (RVD) are sensed via the NLRP3 inflammasome. We found that a decrease in extracellular osmolarity induced a K(+)-dependent conformational change of the preassembled NLRP3-inactive inflammasome during cell swelling, followed by activation of the NLRP3 inflammasome and caspase-1, which was controlled by transient receptor potential channels during RVD. Both mechanisms were necessary for interleukin-1β processing. Increased extracellular osmolarity prevented caspase-1 activation by different known NLRP3 activators. Collectively, our data identify cell volume regulation as a basic conserved homeostatic mechanism associated with the formation of the NLRP3 inflammasome and reveal a mechanism for NLRP3 inflammasome activation.
-------------------------------------

10003275_234 - 0.739160821085 - science
[lhx2, cell, lgr5, hair, hf, sox9, tcf4, stem, mouse, wound]

Lhx2 differentially regulates Sox9, Tcf4 and Lgr5 in hair follicle stem cells to promote epidermal regeneration after injury.
The Lhx2 transcription factor plays essential roles in morphogenesis and patterning of ectodermal derivatives as well as in controlling stem cell activity. Here, we show that during murine skin morphogenesis, Lhx2 is expressed in the hair follicle (HF) buds, whereas in postnatal telogen HFs Lhx2(+) cells reside in the stem cell-enriched epithelial compartments (bulge, secondary hair germ) and co-express selected stem cell markers (Sox9, Tcf4 and Lgr5). Remarkably, Lhx2(+) cells represent the vast majority of cells in the bulge and secondary hair germ that proliferate in response to skin injury. This is functionally important, as wound re-epithelization is significantly retarded in heterozygous Lhx2 knockout (+/-) mice, whereas anagen onset in the HFs located closely to the wound is accelerated compared with wild-type mice. Cell proliferation in the bulge and the number of Sox9(+) and Tcf4(+) cells in the HFs closely adjacent to the wound in Lhx2(+/-) mice are decreased in comparison with wild-type controls, whereas expression of Lgr5 and cell proliferation in the secondary hair germ are increased. Furthermore, acceleration of wound-induced anagen development in Lhx2(+/-) mice is inhibited by administration of Lgr5 siRNA. Finally, Chip-on-chip/ChIP-qPCR and reporter assay analyses identified Sox9, Tcf4 and Lgr5 as direct Lhx2 targets in keratinocytes. These data strongly suggest that Lhx2 positively regulates Sox9 and Tcf4 in the bulge cells, and promotes wound re-epithelization, whereas it simultaneously negatively regulates Lgr5 in the secondary hair germ and inhibits HF cycling. Thus, Lhx2 operates as an important regulator of epithelial stem cell activity in the skin response to injury.
-------------------------------------

10013568_234 - 0.767160195753 - science
[hmgcr, second, peroxisomal, evidence, gene, eukaryotic, mammal, hmg-coa]

A second gene for peroxisomal HMG-CoA reductase? A genomic reassessment
{HMG-CoA} reductase {(HMGCR)} catalyzes the conversion of {HMG-CoA} to mevalonate, the rate-limiting step of eukaryotic isoprenoid biosynthesis, and is the main target of cholesterol-lowering drugs. The classical form of the enzyme is a transmembrane-protein anchored to the endoplasmic reticulum. However, during the last years several lines of evidence pointed to the existence of a second isoform of {HMGCR} localized in peroxisomes, where mevalonate is converted further to farnesyl diphosphate. This finding is relevant for our understanding of the complex regulation and compartmentalization of the cholesterogenic pathway. Here we review experimental evidence suggesting that the peroxisomal activity might be due to a second {HMGCR} gene in mammals. We then present a comprehensive analysis of completely sequenced eukaryotic genomes, as well as the human and mouse genome drafts. Our results provide evidence for a large number of independent duplications of {HMGCR} in all eukaryotic kingdoms, but not for a second gene in mammals. We conclude that the peroxisomal {HMGCR} activity in mammals is due to alternative targeting of the {ER} enzyme to peroxisomes by an as yet uncharacterized mechanisms.
-------------------------------------

10008605_234 - 0.893675108211 - science
[eotaxin, expression, eosinophil, lung, tissue, rat, sephadex, inflammation, airway, cell]

Eotaxin and eotaxin receptor (CCR3) expression in Sephadex particle-induced rat lung inflammation.
The beta chemokine eotaxin is a potent eosinophil activator and chemoattractant. We examined immunohistochemically eotaxin protein expression in a range of normal rat tissues and in rat lung during Sephadex particle-induced pulmonary inflammation. The time course of eotaxin expression in lung at various time points after Sephadex administration was related to the appearance of eosinophils in the bronchoalveolar lavage fluid and tissue distribution of eotaxin receptor (CCR3) positive cells. Results showed that eotaxin protein was constitutively expressed by both lung airway epithelial cells and gut epithelial cells in normal tissues in the absence of inflammation. During Sephadex induced pulmonary inflammation, eotaxin expression increased in alveolar macrophages prior to the major increase in eosinophil numbers which reached a peak at 72 h. The pattern of eotaxin pulmonary expression and the location of CCR3 receptor positive cells suggest a chemoattractant gradient resulting in migration firstly into the tissue and subsequently through the airway epithelium into the airways. Treatment of rats with the glucocorticoid dexamethasone or the immunosuppressant cyclosporin A reduced eosinophil entry into lung tissue and airways but had no apparent effect on eotaxin expression in vivo, indicating that both these drugs inhibit eosinophil recruitment either by an eotaxin-independent mechanism, or by targetting factors that synergise with eotaxin, or an event post eotaxin expression.
-------------------------------------

10011793_234 - 0.933284803463 - science
[method, ilium, surface, estimation, auricular, cited, times, age]

Age estimation from the auricular surface of the ilium: A revised method
Times Cited: 65
-------------------------------------

10005263_234 - 0.848711465368 - science
[forearm, skin, tension, change, radial, supination]

Dynamic skin tension in the forearm: effects of pronation and supination.
PURPOSE: Longitudinal scars on the radial quadrant of the distal forearm skin envelope are typically observed to be wider than those on the ulnar quadrant and have an increased incidence of hypertrophic change. Forearm rotation movements may produce differential skin tensions within the forearm skin envelope, and this may lead to differential scarring patterns. This study was designed to measure skin tension changes in the forearm as a result of rotational position to see if these would be consistent with the hypothesis that greater tension changes are observed on the radial aspect of the forearm. METHODS: The effect of forearm position on the magnitude and direction of skin tension was measured on human volunteers. Standardized circles were marked in circumferential fashion at specified intervals on forearm skin, and the angular and dimensional distortion of these circles that occurred with forearm rotation was measured with caliper and goniometer. Data were analyzed for statistical significance using paired t-test. RESULTS: Pronation and supination resulted in marked angular rotation of the lines of maximal skin tension at all sites on the forearm. Supination resulted in a greater angular deviation of the lines of maximal skin tension from the longitudinal line of usual surgical incision, particularly on the radial aspect of the forearm. In supination, the magnitude of ellipsoid deformation at the distal forearm was greater on the radial aspect compared with that of the ulnar. Similar significant changes were also demonstrated at the mid-forearm and proximal forearm levels. CONCLUSIONS: This study systematically maps the effects of pronation and supination on skin tension within the forearm skin envelope. The significant changes occurring in both the ellipsoid deformation and ellipsoid orientation support our hypothesis that the magnitude of skin tension changes significantly with forearm rotation. The radial aspect of the distal forearm experiences the greatest changes, particularly as the forearm supinates.
-------------------------------------

10005609_234 - 0.93136323993 - medicine
[patient, oesophageal, coronary, disease, normal, angiogram, reflux, abnormality, gastro-oesophageal, angina]

Oesophageal function in patients with angina pectoris: a comparison of patients with normal coronary angiograms and patients with coronary artery disease.
Oesophageal function was assessed in 52 patients with angina pectoris whose coronary angiograms were completely normal and in 21 patients with angina pectoris who had significant coronary artery disease. During a standard oesophageal manometric study, abnormalities were found in 23 (44%) patients with normal coronary angiograms but in only 2 (10%) patients with coronary artery disease (p less than 0.01). Twenty-four (46%) patients with normal coronary angiograms were found to have gastro-oesophageal reflux disease during 24-hour oesophageal pH monitoring. Of the 52 patients with normal coronary angiograms, 19 (37%) had gastro-oesophageal reflux disease and abnormal oesophageal motility, 5 (10%) had gastro-oesophageal reflux disease alone, and 7 (13%) had oesophageal motility disorder alone. The use of provocation procedures, including intravenous edrophonium during oesophageal manometry and treadmill exercise testing during pH monitoring, enabled the oesophageal abnormality to be demonstrated simultaneously with chest pain in 25 of these 31 patients. Typical angina pectoris, coincident with abnormal oesophageal motility, was precipitated in a subgroup of patients who had been shown to have oesophageal manometric abnormalities and gastro-oesophageal reflux disease by the infusion of hydrochloric acid into the oesophagus; both the chest pain and manometric abnormality resolved following the oral administration of antacid.
-------------------------------------

10011838_234 - 0.809019179279 - medicine
[biologic, register, psoriasis, patient, study, datum, cohort, bad, therapy, conventional]

The British Association of Dermatologists' Biologic Interventions Register (BADBIR): design, methodology and objectives.
BACKGROUND: The British Association of Dermatologists (BAD) established a web-based pharmacovigilance register to assess the long-term safety of biologics prescribed for patients with severe psoriasis in September 2007. The BAD Biologic Interventions Register (BADBIR) also participates in the network of European psoriasis biologics registers (Psonet). OBJECTIVES: This prospective observational cohort study compares adult patients with psoriasis treated with biologics vs. a comparator group exposed to conventional systemic therapies. METHODS: Following baseline data acquisition, clinicians record changes in therapy, disease activity and adverse events for 5years (6-monthly for 3years, then annually thereafter). Patient details are flagged lifelong on the National Health Service Information Centre system to capture occurrence of malignancy or death. Primary study endpoints include malignancy, infection, serious adverse events and death. Collection of long-term effectiveness data is a subsidiary aim. RESULTS: By November 2011, the number of dermatology centres actively recruiting across the U.K. and Republic of Ireland had risen to 108 and a further 37 were actively engaged in the set-up process. Of the 3176 patients enrolled in the study to date, 2193 were registered within the biologic cohort and 983 in the conventional systemic (nonbiologic-exposed) cohort. CONCLUSIONS: A robust, high-quality, web-based register of biologic and conventional therapy for psoriasis has been established in the U.K. This is the largest project undertaken by the BAD. The data it will provide over the coming years will be invaluable to the safe use of biologics in clinical practice. A U.K.-wide dermatology clinical research network has been established that provides a framework for future studies in other diseases.
-------------------------------------

10008663_234 - 0.83125204998 - science
[testing, genetic, cancer, dna, somatic, tumour, mutation, alteration, patient, clinical]

Current status and future potential of somatic mutation testing from circulating free DNA in patients with solid tumours.
Genetic alterations can determine the natural history of cancer and its treatment response. With further advances in DNA sequencing technology, multiple novel genetic alterations will be discovered which could be exploited as prognostic, predictive and pharmacodynamic biomarkers in the development and use of cancer therapeutics. As such, the importance in clinical practice of efficient and robust somatic mutation testing in solid tumours cannot be overemphasized in the current era of personalized medicine. However, significant challenges remain regarding the testing of genetic biomarkers in clinical practice. Reliance on archived formalin fixed, paraffin embedded tumour, obtained from diagnostic biopsies, for testing somatic genetic alterations could restrict the scientific community in asking relevant questions about a patient's cancer biology. Problems inherent with using formalin fixed, archival tissue are well recognized and difficult to resolve. It could be argued that to achieve rapid and efficient incorporation of genetic biomarkers into clinical practice, somatic mutation testing in cancer patients should be simpler, less invasive using a readily available clinical sample, whilst maintaining robustness and reproducibility. In this regard, use of circulating free DNA (cfDNA) from plasma or serum as an alternative and/or additional source of DNA to test cancer specific genetic alterations is an attractive proposition. In light of encouraging results from recent studies, this mini review will discuss the current role and future potential of somatic mutation testing from circulating or cell free DNA derived from the blood of patients with solid tumours.
-------------------------------------

10016994_234 - 0.884000801859 - medicine
[treatment, goal, psoriasis, patient, ecp, week, success]

An Assessment of Adalimumab Efficacy in Three Phase III Clinical Trials Using the European Consensus Programme Criteria for Psoriasis Treatment Goals.
Background:  The European Consensus Programme (ECP) established pan-European consensus definitions of psoriasis disease severity and treatment goals among 19 psoriasis experts from European nations. Objectives: Use ECP treatment goals to retrospectively assess adalimumab efficacy in patients who participated in Phase III clinical trials and met ECP criteria for moderate to severe psoriasis. Methods:  Three trials were analyzed: CHAMPION (N=108), REVEAL (N=814), and BELIEVE (N=364). Moderate to severe psoriasis was defined as Dermatology Life Quality Index (DLQI) >10, with either >10% body surface area (BSA) involvement or Psoriasis Area and Severity Index (PASI) >10. Treatment goals were achieved with either Treatment Success (≥75% PASI score reduction) or Intermediate Response (PASI response ≥50% and <75%) with DLQI ≤5. Results:  Percentages of patients who achieved treatment goals at Week 16 in CHAMPION, REVEAL, and BELIEVE were, respectively, 1) Treatment Success, 79.3%, 72.1%, and 68.2%; 2) Intermediate Response, 1.7%, 5.0%, and 5.0%; or 3) either goal, 81.0%, 77.1%, and 73.2%. DLQI ≤5 at Week 16 was achieved by 70.7%, 70.1%, and 67.4% of patients, respectively. Differences between percentages of adalimumab- vs. placebo-treated patients achieving Treatment Success were statistically significant (P <0.001) from Week 4 and Week 8 of REVEAL and CHAMPION, respectively. Conclusion:  Treatment Success was achieved by >93% of patients who attained treatment goals. At Week 16 >70% of patients achieved ECP treatment goals and met ECP criteria for continued treatment without modification. These results support the utility of ECP treatment goals for the assessment of therapeutic efficacy in moderate to severe psoriasis.
-------------------------------------

10008841_234 - 0.82217901825 - technology_and_computing
[system, model, finite-dimensional, observability]

Finite-dimensional behaviour and observability in a randomly forced PDE
In earlier work D.S. Broomhead, J.P. Huke, M.R. Muldoon, and J. Stark, Iterated function system models of digital channels, Proc. R. Soc. Lond. A 460 (2004), pp. 3123–3142, aimed at developing an approach to signal processing that can be applied as well to nonlinear systems as linear ones, we produced mathematical models of digital communications channels that took the form of iterated function systems (IFS). For finite-dimensional systems these models have observability properties indicating they could be used for signal processing applications. Here we see how far the same approach can be taken towards the modelling of an infinite-dimensional system. The cable equation is a well-known partial differential equation (PDE) model of an imperfectly insulated uniform conductor, coupled to its surroundings by capacitive effects. (It is also much used as a basic model in theoretical neurobiology.) In this article we study the dynamics of this system when it is subjected to randomly selected discrete input pulses. The resulting IFS has a unique finite-dimensional attractor; we use results of Falconer and Solomyak to investigate the dimension of this attractor, relating it to the physical parameters of the system. Using work of Robinson, we show how some of the observability properties of the IFS model are retained.
-------------------------------------

10008493_234 - 0.783407176345 - medicine
[cancer, aug, bernadette, clinical, endocrinology, metabolism, england, brennan, practice, acromegaly]

Acromegaly, growth hormone and cancer risk
Renehan, Andrew G Brennan, Bernadette M Review England Best practice & research. Clinical endocrinology & metabolism Best Pract Res Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2008 Aug;22(4):639-57.
-------------------------------------

10014404_234 - 0.735478902117 - medicine
[bowel, irritable, syndrome, cytokine, genotype, patient, interleukin, anti-inflammatory, inflammatory, genetic]

Interleukin 10 genotypes in irritable bowel syndrome: evidence for an inflammatory component?
BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Inflammation may play a role in the pathogenesis of irritable bowel syndrome in some individuals, such as in those who develop symptoms following a dysenteric illness. Persisting inflammation, resulting from an imbalance of cytokines regulating the inflammatory response, is one possible mechanism. As the elaboration of cytokines is under genetic control, this study was designed to establish whether there might be a genetic predisposition to an altered pattern of anti-inflammatory cytokine production in patients with irritable bowel syndrome. SUBJECTS: A total of 230 unselected patients with irritable bowel syndrome and 450 healthy, ethnically matched controls were studied. METHODS: DNA was extracted from peripheral blood leucocytes of subjects. Allele and genotype frequencies were determined for the anti-inflammatory cytokine interleukin 10 at the site (-1082) concerned with production in lymphocytes. Transforming growth factor beta(1) (codons 10 and 25) genotypes were also examined in a smaller group of subjects. RESULTS: Patients with irritable bowel syndrome had significantly reduced frequencies of the high producer genotype for interleukin 10 than controls (21% v 32%; p=0.003). There was no apparent relationship with any particular bowel habit subtype. Genotypes for transforming growth factor beta(1) were not altered. CONCLUSIONS: These preliminary results suggest that at least some patients with irritable bowel syndrome may be genetically predisposed to produce lower amounts of the anti-inflammatory cytokine interleukin 10. This lends some support to the hypothesis that there may be an inflammatory or genetic component in some cases of this condition and that further studies in specific irritable bowel syndrome subgroups are justified.
-------------------------------------

10008671_234 - 0.941748519023 - medicine
[patient, navitoclax, bcl-2, study, sclc, exploratory, phase, cell, tumor]

Phase II study of single-agent navitoclax (ABT-263) and biomarker correlates in patients with relapsed small cell lung cancer.
PURPOSE: Bcl-2 is a critical regulator of apoptosis that is overexpressed in the majority of small cell lung cancers (SCLC). Nativoclax (ABT-263) is a potent and selective inhibitor of Bcl-2 and Bcl-x(L). The primary objectives of this phase IIa study included safety at the recommended phase II dose and preliminary, exploratory efficacy assessment in patients with recurrent and progressive SCLC after at least one prior therapy. EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Thirty-nine patients received navitoclax 325 mg daily, following an initial lead-in of 150 mg daily for 7 days. Study endpoints included safety and toxicity assessment, response rate, progression-free and overall survival (PFS and OS), as well as exploratory pharmacodynamic correlates. RESULTS: The most common toxicity associated with navitoclax was thrombocytopenia, which reached grade III-IV in 41% of patients. Partial response was observed in one (2.6%) patient and stable disease in 9 (23%) patients. Median PFS was 1.5 months and median OS was 3.2 months. A strong association between plasma pro-gastrin-releasing peptide (pro-GRP) level and tumor Bcl-2 copy number (R = 0.93) was confirmed. Exploratory analyses revealed baseline levels of cytokeratin 19 fragment antigen 21-1, neuron-specific enolase, pro-GRP, and circulating tumor cell number as correlates of clinical benefit. CONCLUSION: Bcl-2 targeting by navitoclax shows limited single-agent activity against advanced and recurrent SCLC. Correlative analyses suggest several putative biomarkers of clinical benefit. Preclinical models support that navitoclax may enhance sensitivity of SCLC and other solid tumors to standard cytotoxics. Future studies will focus on combination therapies.
-------------------------------------

10012625_234 - 0.817668255724 - science
[kd, cell, lymphoid, tissue, normal, mc, keloid]

Site-specific immunophenotyping of keloid disease demonstrates immune upregulation and the presence of lymphoid aggregates.
Summary Background  Keloid disease (KD) is a common fibroproliferative disorder of unknown aetiology. T cells and macrophages are increased in KD and are thought to contribute to its pathogenesis. However, while a link between inflammation and fibrotic disorders is well known for other disorders, it remains undetermined in KD. Objectives  Systematically to immunophenotype the inflammatory infiltrate of KD in situ in a site-specific manner, and to compare this with normal skin and scar tissue. Methods  Sixty-eight keloid cases were screened for the presence of all three (intralesional, perilesional and extralesional) keloid-associated specific tissue sites. Subsequently, a complete set of 25 keloid biopsies (from different patients) was compared with normal skin (n = 11) and normal scar (n = 11) samples and subjected to systematic, site-specific quantitative immunohistomorphometry and histochemistry, using a range of immunological markers of B cells, T cells, macrophages, mast cells (MCs) and Langerhans cells. Results  T cells, B cells, degranulated and mature MCs (coexpressing OX40 ligand) and alternative macrophages (M2) were all significantly increased in intralesional and perilesional KD sites compared with normal skin and scar tissue (P < 0·05). Additionally, 10 of 68 KD cases (15%) showed the presence of distinctive lymphoid aggregates, which resembled mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT). Conclusions  The increased number and activity of MCs and M2 may implicate inflammation in the fibrotic process in KD. The distinct KD-associated lymphoid aggregate resembles MALT, for which we propose the term 'keloid-associated lymphoid tissue' (KALT). It may perpetuate inflammatory stimuli that promote KD growth. KALT, MCs and M2 are promising novel targets for future KD therapy.
-------------------------------------

10004035_234 - 0.832167781315 - science
[cell, matrix, nodule, remodeling, cord, expression, increase, force]

The mechanical environment in dupuytren's contracture determines cell contractility and associated MMP-mediated matrix remodeling.
Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are expressed in Dupuytren's contracture and play a role in matrix remodeling. We tested the role of tension on contractility and MMP expression in Dupuytren's nodule and cord cells. Cells were subjected to pre-determined loading patterns of known repeatable magnitudes (static load, unloading, and overloading) and tested for MMP gene expression (MMP-1, -2, -9, -13, and TIMP-1, -2) and force generation using a tension-culture force monitor. Matrix remodeling was assessed by addition of cytochalasin D and residual matrix tension was quantified. Nodule compared to cord and control cells demonstrate greater force generation and remodeling (p < 0.05). Nodule cells subjected to a reduced load and overloading led to threefold increase of MMP-1, -2, and -9 compared to static load, whilst cord and control cells only showed a twofold increase of MMP-9. Nodule cells subjected to overloading showed a twofold increase in TIMP-2 expression, whilst cord and control cells showed a twofold increase in TIMP-1 expression. Nodule cells differ from cord cells by increased force generation in response to changes in the mechanical environment and related MMP/TIMP-mediated matrix remodeling. In turn this may lead to permanent matrix shortening and digital contracture. Interventional therapies should be aimed at nodule cells to prevent contraction and subsequent permanent matrix remodeling. © 2012 Orthopaedic Research Society. Published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc. J Orthop Res.
-------------------------------------

10005584_234 - 0.901704752053 - medicine
[ispaghulum, placebo, bowel, patient, syndrome, transit, time, group, irritable]

Double blind study of ispaghula in irritable bowel syndrome.
A double blind placebo controlled trial of ispaghula husk in 80 patients with irritable bowel syndrome is reported. Global assessment judged treatment to be satisfactory in 82% of patients receiving ispaghula and 53% of the placebo group (p less than 0.02). Bowel habit was unchanged in the placebo group, while constipation significantly improved in patients taking ispaghula (p = 0.026). Transit time decreased significantly in those taking ispaghula compared with placebo (p = 0.001), especially in patients with initially high transit times. Abdominal pain and bloating improved in both groups, with no significant differences between ispaghula and placebo. Four of the eight withdrawals on ispaghula and 10 of the 15 withdrawals on placebo were because of treatment failure. Ispaghula significantly improves overall well being in patients with irritable bowel syndrome, and in those with constipation favourably affects bowel habit and transit time.
-------------------------------------

10009053_234 - 0.808729445431 - science
[tissue, placental, pregnancy, change]

The metabolome of human placental tissue: investigation of first trimester tissue and changes related to preeclampsia in late pregnancy
Unique biochemical and physical challenges to both mother and fetus are observed during human pregnancy, and the placenta plays an important role in protecting the fetus and supporting its development. Consequently, many pregnancy complications are associated with altered placental biochemistry and structure. Here we have further developed a combination of analytical tools for determining the tissue metabolome of placental tissue by applying a methanol/water/chloroform extraction method followed by analysis of the polar fraction (methanol/water) using GC–ToF–MS and of the non-polar fraction (chloroform) using UPLC–LTQ–Orbitrap–MS. This combination maximises the number of different metabolites detected and is the first holistic investigation of placental tissue applying UPLC–MS. Placental tissue differs between early and late first trimester pregnancies in that the developing placenta is exposed to significantly different oxygen tensions and undergoes a change from histiotrophic to haemotrophic nutrition. Application of these metabolomic methods detected 156 unique and chemically identified metabolites that showed statistically significant differences (P < 0.05). These included changes in di- and triglycerides, phospholipids, sphingolipids, fatty acids and fatty acid carnitines. This is the first metabolomics study to identify these changes that potentially show the initiation or switch to fatty acid beta-oxidation for mitochondrial ATP production. A separate study showed a small number of changes that were related to the position of sampling of the placental tissue and to the type of delivery from pregnancy. This result indicates that variations associated with sampling position and delivery type are small compared to between-subject variation. However, the authors recommend robust experimental design which may include sampling from the same position of the placenta and from the same delivery type. When comparing tissue from term-uncomplicated pregnancies with those exhibiting preeclampsia at term, 86 unique and chemically identified metabolites showed statistically significant differences (P < 0.05). Potential changes in metabolism operating in the mitochondria, in vitamin D metabolism and in oxidative and nitrative stress were observed. These proof-of-principle studies demonstrate the sensitivity of placental tissue metabolomics to define changes related to alterations in environment and perfusion and related to diseases of pregnancy including preeclampsia. Data are available on request.
-------------------------------------

10010587_234 - 0.795278495589 - science
[gene, secondary, metabolite, cluster, genome, antismash, analysis, drug]

antiSMASH: rapid identification, annotation and analysis of secondary metabolite biosynthesis gene clusters in bacterial and fungal genome sequences
Bacterial and fungal secondary metabolism is a rich source of novel bioactive compounds with potential pharmaceutical applications as antibiotics, anti-tumor drugs or cholesterol-lowering drugs. To find new drug candidates, microbiologists are increasingly relying on sequencing genomes of a wide variety of microbes. However, rapidly and reliably pinpointing all the potential gene clusters for secondary metabolites in dozens of newly sequenced genomes has been extremely challenging, due to their biochemical heterogeneity, the presence of unknown enzymes and the dispersed nature of the necessary specialized bioinformatics tools and resources. Here, we present {antiSMASH} (antibiotics \& Secondary Metabolite Analysis Shell), the first comprehensive pipeline capable of identifying biosynthetic loci covering the whole range of known secondary metabolite compound classes (polyketides, non-ribosomal peptides, terpenes, aminoglycosides, aminocoumarins, indolocarbazoles, lantibiotics, bacteriocins, nucleosides, beta-lactams, butyrolactones, siderophores, melanins and others). It aligns the identified regions at the gene cluster level to their nearest relatives from a database containing all other known gene clusters, and integrates or cross-links all previously available secondary-metabolite specific gene analysis methods in one interactive view. {antiSMASH} is available at http://antismash.secondarymetabolites.org. ?? 2011 The Author(s).
-------------------------------------

10005254_234 - 0.804749222678 - science
[adhesion, digit, untreated, tendon, biomaterial, cellular]

A novel biomimetic material for engineering postsurgical adhesion using the injured digital flexor tendon-synovial complex as an in vivo model.
BACKGROUND: Many surgical procedures are complicated by adhesions. These restrictive fibrotic bands form between normally separate gliding tissue layers, potentially impairing function. The authors tested the adhesion-modifying effect of a novel fibronectin-derived biomimetic biomaterial in a tendon-synovial complex injury model. METHODS: The deep flexor tendons of digits 2 and 4 in the right forepaw of 15 New Zealand White rabbits were subjected to 5-mm-long partial tenotomies. Animals were randomized to receive biomaterial tubes enveloping the tendon injuries or left untreated. Digits, amputated at 2 weeks, were randomized to mechanical pullout assessments of adhesion strength or to quantitative histologic cellularity and immunohistochemical proliferation (Ki67) assessments. RESULTS: The mean peak pullout force required to break the adhesions was reduced from 7.70 N (n = 6) in untreated digits to 0.31 N (n = 7) in biomaterial-treated digits (p = 0.001). The mean structural stiffness of the adhesions was also significantly reduced (p = 0.001). Histologically, treated and untreated digits demonstrated an equal incidence of adhesions. The treated adhesions were 55 percent less cellular at their surface than the untreated injured controls (p = 0.003). Treated tendons were 8 percent more cellular (with equal numbers of proliferating cells) at their surface and significantly more cellular within their bulk than positive controls (p <or= 0.05). CONCLUSION: This study suggests a significant reduction in the restrictive nature of postsurgical adhesions following treatment with the antiadhesive biomaterial without compromising tendon cellularity.
-------------------------------------

10007509_234 - 0.905849054274 - medicine
[patient, woman, histology, chemotherapy, sex, dose, survival, toxicity, adenocarcinoma, analysis]

The influence of sex and histology on outcomes in non-small-cell lung cancer: a pooled analysis of five randomized trials.
BACKGROUND: Some non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) surgical series have indicated that the positive prognostic effect of female sex is limited to patients with adenocarcinoma. We carried out a retrospective analysis to investigate the role of sex and histology on efficacy, toxicity, and dose delivery after chemotherapy. Patient and methods: Individual patient data were pooled from five randomized, phase III, advanced NSCLC chemotherapy trials. Primary outcomes were response rate, overall survival (OS), toxicity, and dose delivery. A secondary analysis examined survival by sex in histological subgroups. RESULTS: Of 2349 patients, 34% were women. Women had a higher response rate to chemotherapy (42% versus 40%, P = 0.01) and longer survival than men (median OS 9.6 versus 8.6 months, P = 0.002). The difference in OS remained after adjusting for age, stage, performance status, and histology (hazard ratio 0.83, 95% confidence interval 0.74-0.92, P = 0.0005). Upon further examination, longer survival in women was only seen in patients with adenocarcinoma (test for interaction P = 0.006). There were no differences in hematological toxicity or transfusions. Women experienced more grade 3-4 emesis than men (P < 0.0001) and more dose delays (P = 0.02) or dose reductions (P < 0.0001). CONCLUSION: The positive prognostic effect among women is confirmed in patients receiving platinum-based chemotherapy but appears confined to those with adenocarcinoma histology.
-------------------------------------

10007525_234 - 0.905849054274 - medicine
[patient, woman, histology, chemotherapy, sex, dose, survival, toxicity, adenocarcinoma, analysis]

The influence of sex and histology on outcomes in non-small-cell lung cancer: a pooled analysis of five randomized trials.
BACKGROUND: Some non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) surgical series have indicated that the positive prognostic effect of female sex is limited to patients with adenocarcinoma. We carried out a retrospective analysis to investigate the role of sex and histology on efficacy, toxicity, and dose delivery after chemotherapy. Patient and methods: Individual patient data were pooled from five randomized, phase III, advanced NSCLC chemotherapy trials. Primary outcomes were response rate, overall survival (OS), toxicity, and dose delivery. A secondary analysis examined survival by sex in histological subgroups. RESULTS: Of 2349 patients, 34% were women. Women had a higher response rate to chemotherapy (42% versus 40%, P = 0.01) and longer survival than men (median OS 9.6 versus 8.6 months, P = 0.002). The difference in OS remained after adjusting for age, stage, performance status, and histology (hazard ratio 0.83, 95% confidence interval 0.74-0.92, P = 0.0005). Upon further examination, longer survival in women was only seen in patients with adenocarcinoma (test for interaction P = 0.006). There were no differences in hematological toxicity or transfusions. Women experienced more grade 3-4 emesis than men (P < 0.0001) and more dose delays (P = 0.02) or dose reductions (P < 0.0001). CONCLUSION: The positive prognostic effect among women is confirmed in patients receiving platinum-based chemotherapy but appears confined to those with adenocarcinoma histology.
-------------------------------------

10010033_234 - 0.78076697259 - society
[policy, community, social, change]

Public policy, participation and the third position: The implication of engaging communities on their own terms.
Policy development and implementation should be fundamental for community psychologists in their endeavors to create social change. Policy necessarily isengaged at broad social and political levels, but it is mediated through communities and individuals, and thus appealing for our discipline. We argue that there are increasing opportunities for social input in liberal democracies with the growing awareness of the need to consider social factors in policy. Public participation is one aspect of policy development, but it can be problematic and can disempowered communities, especially disadvantaged communities. Using the framework of the ‘third position’, a case study of attempts to ameliorate institutional oppression of Australian Aboriginal people through policy change is described. Structural reform to community engagement is described in terms of empowerment and capacity building. Power relationships are deconstructed toallow understandings of the dynamics of policy change, and the broader implications for community psychological praxis are discussed.
-------------------------------------

10011090_234 - 0.870160116696 - science
[quantification, step, nucleation, study, initial, silica, growth, nanoparticle]

Quantification of initial steps of nucleation and growth of silica nanoparticles: An in-situ SAXS and DLS study
cited By (since 1996) 14
-------------------------------------

10008600_234 - 0.895480614257 - science
[predictive, testing, chemical, species, mechanism, approach, allergic, allergy, novel]

Chemical allergy: Cellular and molecular mechanisms and novel approaches to predictive testing.
A wide variety of chemicals is known to cause allergy-both allergic contact dermatitis and respiratory hypersensitivity. Historically the species of choice for the predictive assessment of sensitizing potential has been the guinea pig, the emphasis being on measurement of allergic reactions provoked by challenge of previously sensitized animals. However, in parallel with enhanced understanding of the mechanisms through which chemical allergy is induced and regulated, there have emerged opportunities to define novel strategies for predictive testing. Much has been achieved in the mouse and this article will focus on new approaches to testing in this species where activity is measured as a function of events occurring during the induction phase of sensitization.
-------------------------------------

10009971_234 - 0.706251126961 - science
[strain, blastospore, mouse, virulent, phagocyte, human]

Resistance of virulent and attenuated strains of Candida albicans to intracellular killing by human and mouse phagocytes.
Blastospores of two strains (no. 19321 and no. 19273) of Candida albicans that were obtained from patients with vaginal thrush and were virulent for mice showed no significant difference in degree of resistance to phagocytosis by human and mouse phagocytes (mostly polymorphonuclear) compared with blastospores of two strains (no. 22114 and no. 21462) that were isolated from patients with transient candidemia and were attenuated for mice. In contrast, more blastospores of the virulent strains survived intracellularly than did those of the attenuated strains over a 2-hr period, after which the surviving blastospores began to form germ tubes. Heterogeneity in the populations of blastospores was suggested, because progeny from surviving blastospores of attenuated strain no. 22114 behaved similarly to virulent strains in tests with human and mouse phagocytes and in virulence tests in mice.
-------------------------------------

10003572_234 - 0.727058355685 - science
[hrdd, polymerase, actii-orf4, rna, holoenzyme, redd, antibiotic]

redD} and {actII-ORF4}, pathway-specific regulatory genes for antibiotic production in Streptomyces coelicolor A3(2), are transcribed in vitro by an {RNA} polymerase holoenzyme containing {??(hrdD)
{redD} and {actII-ORF4}, regulatory genes required for synthesis of the antibiotics undecylprodigiosin and actinorhodin by Streptomyces coelicolor A3(2), were transcribed in vitro by an {RNA} polymerase holoenzyme containing {??(hrdD).} Disruption of {hrdD} had no effect on antibiotic production, indicating that {redD} and {actII-ORF4} are transcribed in vivo by at least one other {RNA} polymerase holoenzyme. These data provide the first experimental evidence that {HrdD} can function as a ?? factor.
-------------------------------------

10006957_234 - 0.799446192081 - science
[atrial, atrium, human, model, tissue, computational, ap, virtual, clinical, normal]

3D virtual human atria: A computational platform for studying clinical atrial fibrillation.
Despite a vast amount of experimental and clinical data on the underlying ionic, cellular and tissue substrates, the mechanisms of common atrial arrhythmias (such as atrial fibrillation, AF) arising from the functional interactions at the whole atria level remain unclear. Computational modelling provides a quantitative framework for integrating such multi-scale data and understanding the arrhythmogenic behaviour that emerges from the collective spatio-temporal dynamics in all parts of the heart. In this study, we have developed a multi-scale hierarchy of biophysically detailed computational models for the human atria--the 3D virtual human atria. Primarily, diffusion tensor MRI reconstruction of the tissue geometry and fibre orientation in the human sinoatrial node (SAN) and surrounding atrial muscle was integrated into the 3D model of the whole atria dissected from the Visible Human dataset. The anatomical models were combined with the heterogeneous atrial action potential (AP) models, and used to simulate the AP conduction in the human atria under various conditions: SAN pacemaking and atrial activation in the normal rhythm, break-down of regular AP wave-fronts during rapid atrial pacing, and the genesis of multiple re-entrant wavelets characteristic of AF. Contributions of different properties of the tissue to mechanisms of the normal rhythm and arrhythmogenesis were investigated. Primarily, the simulations showed that tissue heterogeneity caused the break-down of the normal AP wave-fronts at rapid pacing rates, which initiated a pair of re-entrant spiral waves; and tissue anisotropy resulted in a further break-down of the spiral waves into multiple meandering wavelets characteristic of AF. The 3D virtual atria model itself was incorporated into the torso model to simulate the body surface ECG patterns in the normal and arrhythmic conditions. Therefore, a state-of-the-art computational platform has been developed, which can be used for studying multi-scale electrical phenomena during atrial conduction and AF arrhythmogenesis. Results of such simulations can be directly compared with electrophysiological and endocardial mapping data, as well as clinical ECG recordings. The virtual human atria can provide in-depth insights into 3D excitation propagation processes within atrial walls of a whole heart in vivo, which is beyond the current technical capabilities of experimental or clinical set-ups.
-------------------------------------

10003316_234 - 0.905871345913 - science
[mitochondrial, human, trh, hormone]

Thyrotropin-releasing hormone controls mitochondrial biology in human epidermis.
CONTEXT: Mitochondrial capacity and metabolic potential are under the control of hormones, such as thyroid hormones. The most proximal regulator of the hypothalamic-pituitary-thyroid (HPT) axis, TRH, is the key hypothalamic integrator of energy metabolism via its impact on thyroid hormone secretion. OBJECTIVE: Here, we asked whether TRH directly modulates mitochondrial functions in normal, TRH-receptor-positive human epidermis. METHODS: Organ-cultured human skin was treated with TRH (5-100 ng/ml) for 12-48 h. RESULTS: TRH significantly increased epidermal immunoreactivity for the mitochondria-selective subunit I of respiratory chain complex IV (MTCO1). This resulted from an increased MTCO1 transcription and protein synthesis and a stimulation of mitochondrial biogenesis as demonstrated by transmission electron microscopy and TRH-enhanced mitochondrial DNA synthesis. TRH also significantly stimulated the transcription of several other mitochondrial key genes (TFAM, HSP60, and BMAL1), including the master regulator of mitochondrial biogenesis (PGC-1α). TRH significantly enhanced mitochondrial complex I and IV enzyme activity and enhanced the oxygen consumption of human skin samples, which shows that the stimulated mitochondria are fully vital because the main source for cellular oxygen consumption is mitochondrial endoxidation. CONCLUSIONS: These findings identify TRH as a potent, novel neuroendocrine stimulator of mitochondrial activity and biogenesis in human epidermal keratinocytes in situ. Thus, human epidermis offers an excellent model for dissecting neuroendocrine controls of human mitochondrial biology under physiologically relevant conditions and for exploring corresponding clinical applications.
-------------------------------------

10011736_234 - 0.754248423122 - science
[neuron, processor, time, biological]

SpiNNaker: Distributed Computer Engineering for Neuromorphics
SpiNNaker is a biologically-inspired massively-parallel computer architecture optimized specifically for modeling large-scale systems of spiking neurons in biological real time. The biological inspiration is manifest in the lightweight inter-processor communications architecture, which enables a ???spike??? generated by a neuron modeled on one processor to be transmitted to all of the processors modeling neurons that the source neuron connects to in zero biological time (which we take to be a time much less than a millisecond). The design of such a machine is based upon achieving a balance between the processing power required to execute the neuron and synapse models, the memory hierarchy required to maintain neuron and synapse state sufficiently close to the respective processor, and a communications infrastructure that can meet the latency and bandwidth constraints of the target application.
-------------------------------------

10003227_234 - 0.81650672001 - science
[mrf, action, substrate, selection, cluster]

Is there a brainstem substrate for action selection?
The search for the neural substrate of vertebrate action selection has focused on structures in the forebrain and midbrain, and particularly on the group of sub-cortical nuclei known as the basal ganglia. Yet, the behavioural repertoire of decerebrate and neonatal animals suggests the existence of a relatively self-contained neural substrate for action selection in the brainstem. We propose that the medial reticular formation (mRF) is the substrate's main component and review evidence showing that the mRF's inputs, outputs and intrinsic organization are consistent with the requirements of an action-selection system. The internal architecture of the mRF is composed of interconnected neuron clusters. We present an anatomical model which suggests that the mRF's intrinsic circuitry constitutes a small-world network and extend this result to show that it may have evolved to reduce axonal wiring. Potential configurations of action representation within the internal circuitry of the mRF are then assessed by computational modelling. We present new results demonstrating that each cluster's output is most likely to represent activation of a component action; thus, coactivation of a set of these clusters would lead to the coordinated behavioural response observed in the animal. Finally, we consider the potential integration of the basal ganglia and mRF substrates for selection and suggest that they may collectively form a layered/hierarchical control system.
-------------------------------------

10011647_234 - 0.88398564466 - science
[parasite, optimisation, metabolite, protocol]

Towards an unbiased metabolic profiling of protozoan parasites: Optimisation of a Leishmania sampling protocol for HILIC-orbitrap analysis
Comparative metabolomics of Leishmania species requires the simultaneous identification and quantification of a large number of intracellular metabolites. Here, we describe the optimisation of a comprehensive metabolite extraction protocol for Leishmania parasites and the subsequent optimisation of the analytical approach, consisting of hydrophilic interaction liquid chromatography coupled to {LTQ-orbitrap} mass spectrometry. The final optimised protocol starts with a rapid quenching of parasite cells to 0 {??C}, followed by a triplicate washing step in phosphate-buffered saline. The intracellular metabolome of 4 ?? 10 7 parasites is then extracted in cold chloroform/methanol/water 20/60/20 (v/v/v) for 1 h at 4 {??C}, resulting in both cell disruption and comprehensive metabolite dissolution. Our developed metabolomics platform can detect approximately 20\% of the predicted Leishmania metabolome in a single experiment in positive and negative ionisation mode. ?? 2010 {Springer-Verlag.}
-------------------------------------

10017778_234 - 0.790744274219 - science
[acyl, reaction, exchange, peptide, amine]

Enzymatic Amine Acyl Exchange in Peptides on Gold Surfaces
Reversible as well as stereo- and chemoselective: Various proteases such as thermolysin and chymotrypsin catalyze amine acyl exchange in peptides. This acyl exchange can be used to modify amino-functionalized surfaces under physiological reactions conditions and provides an alternative mechanism for posttranslational transpeptidation reactions such as peptide-splicing reactions in the proteasome.
-------------------------------------

10007498_234 - 0.952961201521 - medicine
[symptom, patient, lung, cancer, experience, cluster]

A qualitative exploration of a respiratory distress symptom cluster in lung cancer: cough, breathlessness and fatigue.
UNLABELLED: There is a growing awareness that symptoms frequently co-occur in 'symptom clusters' and that understanding these clusters may improve the management of unrelieved symptoms in patients. In-depth longitudinal exploration of lung cancer patients' symptom experiences is used to examine patient symptom experiences and distress across the disease trajectory of lung cancer. METHODS: Semi-structured interviews were conducted with patients and their primary caregivers at four time points: at the beginning of treatment and then subsequently at three, six, and twelve months. Interpretative Phenomenological Analysis was employed in the data analysis. FINDINGS: Findings indicate that a cluster of interacting respiratory symptoms play a central role in patients' symptom experiences within the lung cancer population. The interviews also suggest that symptoms such as cough which are under-represented in research within this population may play an important role in patients' symptom experiences. DISCUSSION: Longitudinal qualitative investigation offers a valuable method for improving our understanding of patients' experiences of lung cancer and for identifying potential opportunities to improve patient quality of life.
-------------------------------------

10007863_234 - 0.930099512715 - medicine
[patient, dacomitinib, month, erlotinib, pf, two-sided, ci, kras, median]

Randomized Phase II Study of Dacomitinib (PF-00299804), an Irreversible Pan–Human Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor Inhibitor, Versus Erlotinib in Patients With Advanced Non–Small-Cell Lung Cancer
PURPOSE This randomized, open-label trial compared dacomitinib (PF-00299804), an irreversible inhibitor of human epidermal growth factor receptors (EGFR)/HER1, HER2, and HER4, with erlotinib, a reversible EGFR inhibitor, in patients with advanced non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC). PATIENTS AND METHODS Patients with NSCLC, Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group performance status 0 to 2, no prior HER-directed therapy, and one/two prior chemotherapy regimens received dacomitinib 45 mg or erlotinib 150 mg once daily. Results One hundred eighty-eight patients were randomly assigned. Treatment arms were balanced for most clinical and molecular characteristics. Median progression-free survival (PFS; primary end point) was 2.86 months for patients treated with dacomitinib and 1.91 months for patients treated with erlotinib (hazard ratio HR = 0.66; 95% CI, 0.47 to 0.91; two-sided P = .012); in patients with KRAS wild-type tumors, median PFS was 3.71 months for patients treated with dacomitinib and 1.91 months for patients treated with erlotinib (HR = 0.55; 95% CI, 0.35 to 0.85; two-sided P = .006); and in patients with KRAS wild-type/EGFR wild-type tumors, median PFS was 2.21 months for patients treated with dacomitinib and 1.84 months for patients treated with erlotinib (HR = 0.61; 95% CI, 0.37 to 0.99; two-sided P = .043). Median overall survival was 9.53 months for patients treated with dacomitinib and 7.44 months for patients treated with erlotinib (HR = 0.80; 95% CI, 0.56 to 1.13; two-sided P = .205). Adverse event-related discontinuations were uncommon in both arms. Common treatment-related adverse events were dermatologic and gastrointestinal, predominantly grade 1 to 2, and more frequent with dacomitinib. CONCLUSION Dacomitinib demonstrated significantly improved PFS versus erlotinib, with acceptable toxicity. PFS benefit was observed in most clinical and molecular subsets, notably KRAS wild-type/EGFR any status, KRAS wild-type/EGFR wild-type, and EGFR mutants.
-------------------------------------

10011824_234 - 0.902927777413 - medicine
[patient, alemtuzumab, month, cll, methylprednisolone, response, tp53, treatment, week]

Alemtuzumab in combination with methylprednisolone is a highly effective induction regimen for patients with chronic lymphocytic leukemia and deletion of TP53: final results of the national cancer research institute CLL206 trial.
PURPOSE: In chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL), TP53 deletion/mutation is strongly associated with an adverse outcome and resistance to chemotherapy-based treatment. In contrast, TP53 defects are not associated with resistance to the anti-CD52 monoclonal antibody alemtuzumab or methylprednisolone. In an attempt to improve the treatment of TP53-defective CLL, a multicenter phase II study was developed to evaluate alemtuzumab and methylprednisolone in combination. PATIENTS AND METHODS: Thirty-nine patients with TP53-deleted CLL (17 untreated and 22 previously treated) received up to 16 weeks of treatment with alemtuzumab 30 mg three times a week and methylprednisolone 1.0 g/m(2) for five consecutive days every 4 weeks. Antimicrobial prophylaxis consisted of cotrimoxazole, itraconazole, and aciclovir (or valganciclovir for asymptomatic cytomegalovirus viremia). The primary end point was response as assigned by an end-point review committee. Secondary end points were safety, progression-free survival (PFS) and overall survival (OS). RESULTS: The overall response rate, complete response rate (including with incomplete marrow recovery), median PFS, and median OS were 85%, 36%, 11.8 months, and 23.5 months, respectively, in the entire cohort and 88%, 65%, 18.3 months, and 38.9 months, respectively, in previously untreated patients. Grade 3 to 4 hematologic and glucocorticoid-associated toxicity occurred in 67% and 23% of patients, respectively. Grade 3 to 4 infection occurred in 51% of the overall cohort and in 29% of patients less than 60 years of age. Treatment-related mortality was 5%. CONCLUSION: Alemtuzumab plus methypredisolone is the most effective induction regimen hitherto reported in TP53-deleted CLL. The risk of infection is age related and, in younger patients, seems only marginally higher than that associated with rituximab, fludarabine, and cyclophosphamide.
-------------------------------------

10008058_234 - 0.84643866656 - science
[glucose, let-7, pathway, metabolism]

The Lin28/let-7 axis regulates glucose metabolism.
The let-7 tumor suppressor microRNAs are known for their regulation of oncogenes, while the RNA-binding proteins Lin28a/b promote malignancy by inhibiting let-7 biogenesis. We have uncovered unexpected roles for the Lin28/let-7 pathway in regulating metabolism. When overexpressed in mice, both Lin28a and LIN28B promote an insulin-sensitized state that resists high-fat-diet induced diabetes. Conversely, muscle-specific loss of Lin28a or overexpression of let-7 results in insulin resistance and impaired glucose tolerance. These phenomena occur, in part, through the let-7-mediated repression of multiple components of the insulin-PI3K-mTOR pathway, including IGF1R, INSR, and IRS2. In addition, the mTOR inhibitor, rapamycin, abrogates Lin28a-mediated insulin sensitivity and enhanced glucose uptake. Moreover, let-7 targets are enriched for genes containing SNPs associated with type 2 diabetes and control of fasting glucose in human genome-wide association studies. These data establish the Lin28/let-7 pathway as a central regulator of mammalian glucose metabolism.
-------------------------------------

10003323_234 - 0.897632790095 - science
[microbiota, ibs, fgid, gut, functional]

Intestinal microbiota in functional bowel disorders: a Rome foundation report.
It is increasingly perceived that gut host-microbial interactions are important elements in the pathogenesis of functional gastrointestinal disorders (FGID). The most convincing evidence to date is the finding that functional dyspepsia and irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) may develop in predisposed individuals following a bout of infectious gastroenteritis. There has been a great deal of interest in the potential clinical and therapeutic implications of small intestinal bacterial overgrowth in IBS. However, this theory has generated much debate because the evidence is largely based on breath tests which have not been validated. The introduction of culture-independent molecular techniques provides a major advancement in our understanding of the microbial community in FGID. Results from 16S rRNA-based microbiota profiling approaches demonstrate both quantitative and qualitative changes of mucosal and faecal gut microbiota, particularly in IBS. Investigators are also starting to measure host-microbial interactions in IBS. The current working hypothesis is that abnormal microbiota activate mucosal innate immune responses which increase epithelial permeability, activate nociceptive sensory pathways and dysregulate the enteric nervous system. While we await important insights in this field, the microbiota is already a therapeutic target. Existing controlled trials of dietary manipulation, prebiotics, probiotics, synbiotics and non-absorbable antibiotics are promising, although most are limited by suboptimal design and small sample size. In this article, the authors provide a critical review of current hypotheses regarding the pathogenetic involvement of microbiota in FGID and evaluate the results of microbiota-directed interventions. The authors also provide clinical guidance on modulation of gut microbiota in IBS.
-------------------------------------

10009456_234 - 0.833336507993 - science
[tumor, imaging, cell]

The use of fluorescent proteins for intravital imaging of cancer cell invasion.
The analysis of tumor cell behavior at the primary tumor in living animals provides an opportunity to explore the process of invasion and intravasation in the complex microenvironment that is present in vivo.  In this chapter we describe the methods that we utilize for performing intravital imaging of mammary tumors.  We provide procedures for generating tumors through injection of tumor cell lines, and multiphoton imaging using a skin flap tumor dissection and a mammary imaging window.
-------------------------------------

10016738_234 - 0.913081012536 - science
[concavity, shape, symmetry, perception, convexity, axis]

Concavities count for less in symmetry perception.
We investigated the relative importance of convexities (protrusions) and concavities (indentations) for the perception of shape. On the one hand, it has been suggested that convexities determine the shape of an object, whereas concavities merely act as "perceptual glue" between t he convexities. On the other hand, it hasbeen argued that concavities are more salient than convexities. We show that participants find it easier to detect asymmetry in a 2-D silhouette when there is a mismatch between the shapes of convexities on either side of the axis of symmetry than when there is a mismatch between the shapes o f concavities. This is the case even whenthe concavities are closest to the axis of symmetry, and despite the usual bias toward this axis in symmetry perception. We suggest that the actual shape of concavities is less important in symmetry perception, because the main role of concavities is to act as part boundaries in the representation of the shape of objects.
-------------------------------------

10005262_234 - 0.908246917548 - science
[gene, keloid, margin, kd, biopsy, skin, culture, expression, study, biomarker]

Identification of novel keloid biomarkers through profiling of tissue biopsies versus cell cultures in keloid margin specimens compared to adjacent normal skin.
OBJECTIVE: Keloid disease (KD) is a benign fibroproliferative skin tumor that results from abnormal wound healing and has no single definitive treatment. This study aims to identify KD biomarkers, which are cellular mediators that can serve as indicators of normal, pathological, and therapeutic processes. METHODS: Bioinformatics analytic approaches, including comprehensive literature searches and DAVID Bioinformatics Resources 2008, were performed on the established KD linkage and previously reported microarray data to identify potential candidate genes for the study. Keloid margins and unaffected skin were obtained from KD patients (n = 4). RNA was extracted from the biopsies and second-passage culture equivalents. Reverse-transcriptase quantitative polymerase chain reactions were used to determine the gene expression levels. Student t tests were used to analyze the statistical significance in differential gene expressions. RESULTS: Nineteen candidate genes were initially selected by bioinformatics analysis. Of the 19 genes, 10 were significantly (P < .05) upregulated in keloid margin biopsy specimens. The top-5 fold changes range from 10-fold to 175-fold, including aggrecan; asporin; inhibin, beta A; tumor necrosis factor-alpha inducible protein 6; and chromosome 5 open reading frame 13. There was no significant differential gene expression between the fibroblasts established using keloid margin or internal control sites. CONCLUSIONS: The transcriptomic data generated from cultures did not consistently correlate to the biopsy equivalents. This study has demonstrated 10 genes that are significantly upregulated in biopsy samples of keloid margin, 5 of which have a fold change higher than 10-fold. Importantly these genes may serve as a potential biomarker for KD.
-------------------------------------

10009723_234 - 0.925175949758 - medicine
[mutation, patient, c9orf72, dementia, motor, frontotemporal, neuron, disease, pathology, psychosis]

Distinct clinical and pathological characteristics of frontotemporal dementia associated with C9ORF72 mutations.
The identification of a hexanucleotide repeat expansion in the C9ORF72 gene as the cause of chromosome 9-linked frontotemporal dementia and motor neuron disease offers the opportunity for greater understanding of the relationship between these disorders and other clinical forms of frontotemporal lobar degeneration. In this study, we screened a cohort of 398 patients with frontotemporal dementia, progressive non-fluent aphasia, semantic dementia or mixture of these syndromes for mutations in the C9ORF72 gene. Motor neuron disease was present in 55 patients (14%). We identified 32 patients with C9ORF72 mutations, representing 8% of the cohort. The patients' clinical phenotype at presentation varied: nine patients had frontotemporal dementia with motor neuron disease, 19 had frontotemporal dementia alone, one had mixed semantic dementia with frontal features and three had progressive non-fluent aphasia. There was, as expected, a significant association between C9ORF72 mutations and presence of motor neuron disease. Nevertheless, 46 patients, including 22 familial, had motor neuron disease but no mutation in C9ORF72. Thirty-eight per cent of the patients with C9ORF72 mutations presented with psychosis, with a further 28% exhibiting paranoid, deluded or irrational thinking, whereas <4% of non-mutation bearers presented similarly. The presence of psychosis dramatically increased the odds that patients carried the mutation. Mutation bearers showed a low incidence of motor stereotypies, and relatively high incidence of complex repetitive behaviours, largely linked to patients' delusions. They also showed a lower incidence of acquired sweet food preference than patients without C9ORF72 mutations. Post-mortem pathology in five patients revealed transactive response DNA-binding protein 43 pathology, type A in one patient and type B in three. However, one patient had corticobasal degeneration pathology. The findings indicate that C9ORF72 mutations cause some but not all cases of frontotemporal dementia with motor neuron disease. Other mutations remain to be discovered. C9ORF72 mutations are associated with variable clinical presentations and pathology. Nevertheless, the findings highlight a powerful association between C9ORF72 mutations and psychosis and suggest that the behavioural characteristics of patients with C9ORF72 mutations are qualitatively distinct. Mutations in the C9ORF72 gene may be a major cause not only of frontotemporal dementia with motor neuron disease but also of late onset psychosis.
-------------------------------------

10015775_234 - 0.838783856422 - science
[phytoestrogen, steroid, enzyme, effect]

Inhibition of 17beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenases by phytoestrogens: Comparison with other steroid metabolizing enzymes
Effects of phytoestrogens on human health have been reported for decades. These include not only beneficial action in cancer prevention but also endocrine disruption in males. Since then many molecular mechanisms underlying these effects have been identified. Targets of phytoestrogens comprise steroid receptors, steroid metabolising enzymes, elements of signal transduction and apoptosis pathways, and even the DNA processing machinery. Understanding the specific versus pleiotropic effects of selected phytoestrogens will be crucial for their biomedical application. This review will concentrate on the influence of phytoestrogens on 17beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenases from a comparative perspective with other steroid metabolizing enzymes. ?? 2004 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
-------------------------------------

10006910_234 - 0.767006008586 - science
[apc, platelet, monocyte, differentiation, pf-4, il-4, pfapc, cell]

Platelet factor 4 in conjunction with IL-4 directs differentiation of human monocytes into specialized antigen-presenting cells.
Recent evidence suggests that platelets are not only involved in haemostatic processes but also modulate immune responses. As antigen-presenting cells (APC) are of crucial importance for the regulation of immunity, in this study we wanted to define the role of platelet factor 4 (PF-4) as one of the major platelet-derived chemokines on the transition of monocytes into APCs. Our experiments show that within 3 days PF-4 in conjunction with IL-4 induces a rapid differentiation of monocytes into APC. These PFAPC (PF-4/IL-4 differentiated APC) display unique phenotypical and functional characteristics setting them apart from macrophages and conventional dendritic cells. Functional studies revealed that PFAPC preferentially stimulated proliferation of lymphocytes and lytic NK activity while they induced only moderate cytokine responses. Beyond day 3 of differentiation, PFAPC became less immunostimulatory and maintained their capacity to phagocytose particulate material even after LPS-induced maturation. These experiments uncover a previously unknown role for the platelet-derived CXC-chemokine PF-4 in differentiation of human APC. Our data further support the newly discovered function of platelets in immunomodulation and provide new evidence for a rapid transition of monocytes into APC under the influence of inflammatory stimuli.
-------------------------------------

10017144_234 - 0.841573464505 - science
[energy, single-particle, reaction, tensor, interaction, state]

Trends in single-particle energies in N=51 nuclei
A systematic study of the neutron single-particle states in N=51 isotones has been performed. Final states in 89Sr, 91Zr and 93Mo have been populated using the (d,p) and (alpha,3He) single-neutron adding reactions. The Yale tandem provided beams of 15-MeV deuterons and 50-MeV alpha particles with the outgoing ejectiles momentum analysed using an Enge split-pole spectrometer. A supplementary measurement of the d(86Kr,p)87Kr reaction, at a beam energy of 10 MeV/u, was made in inverse kinematics using the HELIOS spectrometer. Outgoing protons execute a helical orbit in a uniform field before detection, before they return to axis, using a position-sensitive silicon array. Absolute cross sections were measured for states up to 4 MeV in excitation. The transferred angular momentum was identified through a comparison of angular distributions and the ratio of cross section between reactions. Relative spectroscopic factors were extracted through a DWBA analysis.The measured centroids for the single-particle energies of the s1/2, d3/2, d5/2, g7/2 and h11/2 orbitals were compared to calculations using a Gaussian central potential with and without the addition of a tensor interaction. Through this comparison it was deduced that the inclusion of a tensor interaction is required to explain the observed shifts in the single-particle energies of the d3/2 and g7/2 orbitals. This system provided an observation of a switch in behaviour, from repulsive to attractive and vice versa, of the effect of the tensor interaction. This occurs due to a change from j> to j< proton occupancy at Z=40.
-------------------------------------

10018338_234 - 0.881743544659 - science
[cell, eosinophilia, ox40, ox40l, neoforman]

OX40 ligation on activated T cells enhances the control of Cryptococcus neoformans and reduces pulmonary eosinophilia.
Pulmonary eosinophilia induced in C57BL/6 mice after Cryptococcus neoformans infection is driven by CD4(+) Th2 cells. The immunological mechanisms that protect against eosinophilia are not fully understood. Interaction of OX40 (CD134) and its ligand, OX40L, has been implicated in T cell activation and cell migration. Unlike CD28, OX40 is only expressed on T cells 1-2 days after Ag activation. Manipulation of this pathway would therefore target recently activated T cells, leaving the naive repertoire unaffected. In this study, we show that engagement of OX40 by an OX40L:Ig fusion protein drives IFN-gamma production by CD4(+) T cells and reduces eosinophilia and C. neoformans burden in the lung. Using gene-depleted mice, we show that reduction of eosinophilia and pathogen burden requires IL-12 and/or IFN-gamma. C. neoformans infection itself only partially induces OX40L expression by APCs. Provision of exogenous OX40L reveals a critical role of this pathway in the prevention of C. neoformans-induced eosinophilia.
-------------------------------------

10003289_234 - 0.838754056267 - science
[pca, hair, follicle, cell, alopecia, inflammatory, key, stem]

The pathogenesis of primary cicatricial alopecias.
Cicatricial (scarring) alopecia results from irreversible damage to epithelial stem cells located in the bulge region of the hair follicle, generally as a result of inflammatory mechanisms (eg, in the context of autoimmune disease). In primary cicactricial alopecia (PCA), the hair follicle itself is the key target of autoaggressive immunity. This group of permanent hair loss disorders can be classified into distinct subgroups, characterized by the predominant peri-follicular inflammatory cell type. In none of these PCA forms do we know exactly why hair follicles begin to attract such an infiltrate. Thus, it is not surprising that halting or even reversing this inflammation in PCA is often extremely difficult. However, increasing evidence suggests that healthy hair follicle epithelial stem cells enjoy relative protection from inflammatory assault by being located in an immunologically "privileged" niche. Because this protection may collapse in PCA, one key challenge in PCA research is to identify the specific signaling pathways that endanger, or restore, the relative immunoprotection of these stem cells. After a summary of pathobiological principles that underlie the development and clinical phenotype of PCA, we close by defining key open questions that need to be answered if more effective treatment modalities for this therapeutically very frustrating, but biologically fascinating, group of diseases are to be developed.
-------------------------------------

10005680_234 - 0.846879166991 - medicine
[syndrome, ibs, symptom, patient]

Nongastrointestinal disorders in the irritable bowel syndrome.
A large proportion of irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) patients also complain of other functional disorders, such as headache, noncardiac chest pain, low back pain, and dysuria. Some of these features, particularly headache, may have a negative influence on the outcome of IBS. In a large proportion of female IBS patients, sexual intercourse triggers the symptoms, and frequently IBS symptoms exacerbate during menses. These gynecological-type symptoms often mislead the patients to the gynecological clinic, which may imply unnecessary investigations and inappropriate treatments. The diagnostic criteria of the fibromyalgia syndrome include IBS, and hence, the apparent relationship of both syndromes is difficult to analyze. On the other hand, no convincing evidence has been produced to date to sustain an association between IBS and the chronic fatigue syndrome.
-------------------------------------

10005567_234 - 0.736379002439 - medicine
[month, asthma, posaconazole, patient, voriconazole, abpa, saf]

Voriconazole and posaconazole improve asthma severity in allergic                    bronchopulmonary aspergillosis and severe asthma with fungal                    sensitization.
Rationale and objectives. Severe asthma with fungal sensitization                        (SAFS) and allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis (ABPA) are progressive                        allergic fungal lung diseases whose effective treatment remains to be                        established. Current treatment with itraconazole is associated with a 40%                        failure rate and adverse events (AEs). We assessed the effect of                        voriconazole or posaconazole as second- and third-line therapies. Methods.                        We conducted a retrospective review of adult asthmatic patients with either                        ABPA or SAFS receiving voriconazole or posaconazole. Clinical, radiological,                        and immunological evaluation was used to assess response. Results. There                        were 25 patients, ABPA (n = 20) or SAFS (n = 5), 10 males, median age = 58                        years. All patients had failed itraconazole (n = 14) or developed AEs (n =                        11). There were 33 courses of therapy analyzed, 24 with voriconazole and 9                        with posaconazole. Clinical response to voriconazole was observed in 17/24                        (70%) patients at 3 months, 15/20 (75%) at 6 months, and 12/16 (75%) at 12                        months compared with 7/9 (78%) at 3, 6, and 12 months for posaconazole.                        Eighteen of 24 (75%) patients discontinued oral corticosteroids (OCS), 12 of                        them within 3 months of therapy. Asthma severity was downgraded from severe                        to moderate (n = 8) and moderate to mild (n = 1) asthma in 9 of 24 (38%)                        asthmatic patients. There was a marked reduction in OCS and short-acting                        beta-2 agonist use, health-care utilization due to asthma, and improvement                        in overall health status. Furthermore, there was a statistically significant                        reduction in immunological markers appearing at 9 months (p = .008) for                        total IgE and at 12 months for radioallergosorbent test IgE for Aspergillus                        fumigatus (p = .0056). Six of 23 (26%) patients on voriconazole had AEs                        requiring discontinuation before 6 months compared with none on posaconazole                        (p = .15). Four relapsed (57%), one at 3 months and three at 12 months after                        discontinuation. Conclusion. Both voriconazole and posaconazole are                        potentially effective alternative treatment options for SAFS and ABPA and                        may improve asthma control and reduce severity, though larger prospective                        studies are required to support these retrospective study                        findings.
-------------------------------------

10014413_234 - 0.858279358077 - science
[neuroanatomical, cross-sectional, mri, abnormality, onset, jour, longitudinal, psychosis, comparison]

Neuroanatomical abnormalities before and after onset of psychosis: a cross-sectional and longitudinal MRI comparison.
TY - JOUR
-------------------------------------

10009849_234 - 0.812206421272 - science
[times, variability, composition, degree, south, east, cited, atmospheric, pacific, vocals-rex]

South East Pacific atmospheric composition and variability sampled along 20 degrees S during VOCALS-REx
Times Cited: 1
-------------------------------------

10006964_234 - 0.783047303704 - science
[tissue, d172n, re-entry, model, kir2, re-entrant, vulnerability, excitation, ventricular, mutant]

Proarrhythmia in KCNJ2-linked short QT syndrome: insights from modelling.
AIMS: One form of the short QT syndrome (SQT3) has been linked to the D172N gain-in-function mutation to Kir2.1, which preferentially increases outward current through channels responsible for inward rectifier K(+) current (I(K1)). This study investigated mechanisms by which the Kir2.1 D172N mutation facilitates and perpetuates ventricular arrhythmias. METHODS AND RESULTS: The ten Tusscher et al. model for human ventricular action potentials (APs) was modified to incorporate changes to I(K1) based on experimentally observed changes to Kir2.1 function: both heterozygous (WT-D172N) and homozygous (D172N) mutant scenarios were studied. Cell models were incorporated into heterogeneous one-dimensional (1D), 2D tissue, and 3D models to compute the restitution curves of AP duration (APD-R), effective refractory period (ERP-R), and conduction velocity (CV). Temporal and spatial vulnerability of ventricular tissue to re-entry was measured and dynamic behaviour of re-entrant excitation waves (lifespan and dominant frequency) in 2D and 3D models of the human ventricle was characterized. D172N 'mutant' I(K1) led to abbreviated APD and ERP, as well as steeper APD-R and ERP-R curves. It reduced tissue excitability at low excitation rates but increased it at high rates. It increased tissue temporal vulnerability for initiating re-entry, but reduced the minimal substrate size necessary to sustain re-entry. SQT3 'mutant' I(K1) also stabilized and accelerated re-entrant excitation waves, leading to sustained rapid re-entry. CONCLUSION: Increased I(K1) due to the Kir2.1 D172N mutation increases arrhythmia risk due to increased tissue vulnerability, shortened ERP, and altered excitability, which in combination facilitate initiation and maintenance of re-entrant circuits.
-------------------------------------

10011662_234 - 0.97180874401 - education
[school, teacher, education, team, joint, partnership, school-university, university, professional, study]

Rethinking partnership in initial teacher education – developing professional identities for a new subject specialist team which includes a joint school-university appointment – a case study in mathematics
A new team of mathematics educators is establishing at the University of Manchester. One member of the team is a joint school-university appointment. A former local authority consultant she now works 50% in a partnership training school where she mentors four students and 50% as a PGCE tutor contributing to all elements of the PGCE course including subject specific and professional studies sessions, tutoring a number of students including school visits.What are the affordances of a joint school-university appointment? What are the personal challenges for the appointee and colleagues working with the appointee – in school and in university?Evidence for the paper is through personal reflective accounts, and focus group discussions with school and university colleagues. There will also be an anonymous questionnaire of student teachers to find out whether the joint school-university appointee’s support is qualitatively different to that of other tutors.Becoming a teacher educator is challenging at the best of times (Berry, 2007; Swennen & van der Klink, 2009), as is establishing yourself as a teacher in a new school (Day et al. 2007). To do both at once is novel, but given current government priorities something that is likely to become more commonplace, with initiatives such as School Direct (TDA, 2011).Professional identity provides a means of interpreting the way practitioners conduct their work (Day et al, 2005) and the development needs they prioritise. In school there are priorities of learning systems and policies and establishing oneself as a member of the adult community. In higher education this often includes embarking on Masters level study as a requirement for becoming a higher education lecturer (HE academy n.d.). The outcomes of this early experience have implications for the developing practice of the University of Manchester PGCE mathematics team and the way in which university and school based colleagues work together to optimise learning for beginning teachers, as new models of ITE are adopted within a well-established partnership. These implications may provide areas for consideration by institutions rethinking partnership in initial teacher education.
-------------------------------------

10009679_234 - 0.810063402898 - science
[diffusion, treatment, tumor, length, adc, scale, time, long, cell, temporal]

Characterizing tumor response to chemotherapy at various length scales using temporal diffusion spectroscopy.
Measurements of apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) using magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) have been suggested as potential imaging biomarkers for monitoring tumor response to treatment. However, conventional pulsed-gradient spin echo (PGSE) methods incorporate relatively long diffusion times, and are usually sensitive to changes in cell density and necrosis. Diffusion temporal spectroscopy using the oscillating gradient spin echo (OGSE) sequence is capable of probing short length scales, and may detect significant intracellular microstructural changes independent of gross cell density changes following anti-cancer treatment. To test this hypothesis, SW620 xenografts were treated by barasertib (AZD1152), a selective inhibitor of Aurora B kinase which causes SW620 cancer cells to develop polyploidy and increase in size following treatment, ultimately leading to cell death through apoptosis. Following treatment, the ADC values obtained by both the PGSE and low frequency OGSE methods increased. However, the ADC values at high gradient frequency (i.e. short diffusion times) were significantly lower in treated tumors, consistent with increased intracellular restrictions/hindrances. This suggests that ADC values at long diffusion times are dominated by tumor microstructure at long length scales, and may not convey unambiguous information of subcellular space. While the diffusion temporal spectroscopy provides more comprehensive means to probe tumor microstructure at various length scales. This work is the first study to probe intracellular microstructural variations due to polyploidy following treatment using diffusion MRI in vivo. It is also the first observation of post-treatment ADC changes occurring in opposite directions at short and long diffusion times. The current study suggests that temporal diffusion spectroscopy potentially provides pharmacodynamic biomarkers of tumor early response which distinguish microstructural variations following treatment at both the subcellular and supracellular length scales.
-------------------------------------

10015766_234 - 0.920082445786 - science
[condition, goethite, alkaline, mechanism, presence, phosphate, kinetics, hematite, crystallization]

The kinetics and mechanisms of goethite and hematite crystallization under alkaline conditions, and in the presence of phosphate
cited By (since 1996) 25
-------------------------------------

10018169_234 - 0.925727334853 - science
[oxidation, marinobacter, nksg1, strain, bacterium, organic, omega, genus, reduction]

Marinobacter santoriniensis sp nov., an arsenate-respiring and arsenite-oxidizing bacterium isolated from hydrothermal sediment
A Gram-negative, arsenate-respiring and arsenite-oxidizing marine bacterium, NKSG1(T), was isolated from hydrothermal sediment at Santorini, Greece. Strain NKSG1T was a facultatively anaerobic, motile, non-spore-forming, rod-shaped bacterium. Growth occurred optimally at 35-40 degrees C, between pH 5.5 and 9.0 and with 0.5-16\% NaCl. Energy was conserved by the aerobic oxidation of a range of complex substrates, carbohydrates and organic acids, or anaerobically by arsenate reduction, nitrate reduction coupled to the oxidation of organic carbon or lactate fermentation. Oxidation of arsenite and anaerobic nitrate-dependent oxidation of Fe(II) were facilitated by the presence of an organic carbon source. The DNA G + C content was 58.1 mol\%. The major respiratory quinone was Q-9. The significant fatty acids were 16 : 1 omega 9c, summed feature 3(iso-15 : 0 2-OH/16 : 1 omega 7c), 16 : 0 and 18 : 1 omega 9c. Analysis of 16S rRNA gene sequences showed that strain NKSG1(T) fits within the phylogenetic cluster of the genus Marinobacter and is most closely related to Marinobacter koreensis DD-M3(T) (99.3\% similarity). The degree of relatedness with M. koreensis DSM 17924(T) based on DNA-DNA hybridization was 56\%. The results of a polyphasic study indicated that strain NKSG1(T) is a representative of a novel species within the genus Marinobacter, for which the name Marinobacter santoriniensis sp. nov. is proposed. The type strain is NKSG1(T) (=DSM 21262(T)=NCIMB 14441(T)=ATCC BAA-1649(T)). The capacity for arsenic reduction or oxidation has not been demonstrated previously for this genus.
-------------------------------------

10005334_234 - 0.919343949178 - medicine
[doctor, patient, health, hour, outcome, practice, service, satisfaction, care, general]

Comparison of out of hours care provided by patients' own general practitioners and commercial deputising services: a randomised controlled trial. II: The outcome of care.
OBJECTIVE: To compare the outcome of out of hours care given by general practitioners from patients' own practices and by commercial deputising services. DESIGN: Randomised controlled trial. SETTING: Four urban areas in Manchester, Salford, Stockport, and Leicester. SUBJECTS: 2152 patients who requested out of hours care, and 49 practice doctors and 183 deputising doctors (61% local principals in general practice) who responded to the requests. MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Health status outcome, patient satisfaction, and subsequent health service use. RESULTS: Patients seen by deputising doctors were less satisfied with the care they received. The mean overall satisfaction score for practice doctors was 70.7 (95% confidence interval 68.1 to 73.2) and for deputising doctors 61.8 (59.9 to 63.7). The greatest difference in satisfaction was with the delay in visiting. There were no differences in the change in health or overall health status measured 24 to 120 hours after the out of hours call or subsequent use of the health service in the two groups. CONCLUSIONS: Patients are more satisfied with the out of hours care provided by practice doctors than that provided by deputising doctors. Organisation of doctors into large groups may produce lower levels of patient satisfaction, especially when associated with increased delays in the time taken to visit. There seem to be no appreciable differences in health outcome between the two types of service.
-------------------------------------

10005488_234 - 0.955186369485 - medicine
[patient, nurse, doctor, estimate, survival]

Prognosticating in patients with advanced cancer--observational study comparing the accuracy of clinicians' and patients' estimates of survival.
BackgroundClinicians' prognoses in patients with advanced cancer are imprecise. The aim of this study was to compare doctors', nurses' and patients' survival predictions and to identify factors which influence accuracy.Patients and methodsSome 1018 patients with advanced cancer were recruited. Survival estimates were obtained from the attending doctor, nurse, multidisciplinary team (MDT) and patient (n = 829, 954, 987 and 290 estimates, respectively) and were compared with actual survival. Clinician and patient characteristics were recorded.ResultsMDTs', doctors' and nurses' predictions were accurate 57.5%, 56.3% and 55.5% of occasions, respectively. Nurses were less accurate than the MDT (P = 0.007) but were no worse than doctors (P = 0.284). Estimates of clinicians and patients were more optimistic (doctors: 31%; nurses: 34%; MDT: 31.1%; patients: 45.1%) than pessimistic (12.7%, 11%, 11.4% and 2.7%). Nurses' accuracy increased if they had reviewed the patient within 24 h. Most patients (61.4%) wanted to know their prognosis. Only 37.1% were willing to offer an estimate regarding their own survival. Patients' prognostic estimates were less accurate than health care professionals' (P < 0.001).ConclusionsMDTs were better at predicting survival than doctors' or nurses' alone. Patients were substantially worse. Among nurses, recency of review was related to improved prognostic accuracy.
-------------------------------------

10002032_234 - 0.945689650714 - medicine
[muc1, patient, carcinoma, ck7, advanced, breast, cell, control, blood, peripheral]

Identification of carcinoma cells in peripheral blood samples of patients with advanced breast carcinoma using RT-PCR amplification of CK7 and MUC1.
We have undertaken a pilot study to attempt to identify circulating carcinoma cells in a series of patients with advanced breast carcinoma, using reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) to amplify mRNA of epithelial specific antigens. Using this method to amplify mRNA of MUC1 and cytokeratin 7 (CK7) the sensitivity of the technique was demonstrated by means of diluted concentrations of "spiked MCF7" cells in whole blood, showing a detection limit of 1 in 10(6) (CK7) and 1 in 10(5) (MUC1). Positive results were obtained from the peripheral blood of all nine female patients with advanced breast cancer for CK7 and eight of the nine patients for MUC1. CK7 was however detected in five of 11 healthy controls (eight females, three males) and MUC1 in one of the 11 controls. None of the control group were positive for both CK7 and MUC1, in contrast to eight of the nine patients with advanced breast carcinoma who were positive for both markers. The RT-PCR method thus appears sufficiently sensitive to identify circulating tumour cells in peripheral blood samples from patients with advanced breast carcinoma. However a high proportion of false-positive results was seen in the control population. More extensive investigation is required before the technique is likely to be of benefit clinically.
-------------------------------------

10015125_234 - 0.916541161116 - science
[concn, droplet, sulfate, relation]

Parameterization of the cloud droplet-sulfate relationship.
Cloud droplet no. and cloud-water sulfate ion concn. data were compiled from several in-cloud studies at elevated marine and continental sites. Log-log relations between droplet concn. and clear air equiv. non-sea-salt sulfate (NSS) concn. in the droplets were derived. The slope of the clear air equiv. (CAE) NSS concn.-droplet no. concn. relation presented here is higher than those detd. in most previous studies and the relation is log-log-linear over a wide range of CAE sulfate concns. on SciFinder (R)
-------------------------------------

10010337_234 - 0.889886895184 - science
[metabolic, different, microorganism, state]

Exploring the metabolic state of microorganisms using metabolomics
Microorganisms depend on their ability to modulate their metabolic composition according to specific circumstances, such as different phases of the growth cycle and circadian rhythms, fluctuations in environmental conditions, as well as experimental perturbations. A thorough understanding of these metabolic adaptations requires the ability to comprehensively identify and quantify the metabolome of bacterial cells in different states. In this review, we present an overview of the diverse metabolomics approaches recently adopted to explore the metabolism of a wide variety of microorganisms. Focusing on a selection of illustrative case studies, we assess the different experimental designs used and explore the major achievements and remaining challenges in the field. We conclude by discussing the important complementary information provided by computational methods such as genome-scale metabolic modeling, which enable an integrated analysis of metabolic state changes in the context of overall cellular physiology. ?? 2011 Future Science Ltd.
-------------------------------------

10004705_234 - 0.806208843299 - science
[gene, transfer, intron, spliceosomal]

Evolution of spliceosomal introns following endosymbiotic gene transfer.
Spliceosomal introns are an ancient, widespread hallmark of eukaryotic genomes. Despite much research, many questions regarding the origin and evolution of spliceosomal introns remain unsolved, partly due to the difficulty of inferring ancestral gene structures. We circumvent this problem by using genes originated by endosymbiotic gene transfer, in which an intron-less structure at the time of the transfer can be assumed.
-------------------------------------

10018354_234 - 0.88760579334 - science
[eosinophilia, mouse, lung, cell, cd8]

Host genetic determinants of vaccine-induced eosinophilia during respiratory syncytial virus infection.
In BALB/c mice, sensitization with the attachment protein (G) of respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) leads to CD4+ T cell-mediated lung eosinophilia during subsequent challenge with RSV. To determine the host genetic influences on this model of lung eosinophilia, we tested 15 different inbred mouse strains. Eosinophilia developed in all H-2d (BALB/c, DBA/2n, and B10.D2), but not in H-2k (CBA/Ca, CBA/J, C3H, BALB.K, or B10.BR) mouse strains. Among H-2b mice, 129 and BALB.B developed eosinophilia, whereas C57BL/6 and C57BL/10 did not. Testing first generation crosses between sensitive and resistant strains showed that eosinophilia developed in all H-2dxk (n = 5), irrespective of background genes, but not in H-2dxb (n = 2) mice. In vivo depletion of CD8+ T cells or IFN-gamma rendered C57BL/6, but not BALB.K mice, susceptible to eosinophilia. Analysis of B10 recombinant mice showed that the Dd allele (in B10.A(5R) mice) prevented CD8+ T cell accumulation in the lung, resulting in intense lung eosinophilia. However, the Db allele (in B10.A(2R) and B10.A(4R) mice) supported CD8+ T cell expansion and prevented eosinophilia. Intracellular cytokine staining showed that lung eosinophilia correlated with reduced IFN-gamma and increased IL-10 expression in lung T cells. These results are compatible with the unifying model that Th2 cells mediate the disease but can be inhibited by CD8+ T cells secreting IFN-gamma. Our findings have important implications for the development of protective, nonpathogenic vaccines for RSV disease.
-------------------------------------

10004722_234 - 0.760128593923 - medicine
[antipsychotic, hospital, day, number, second-generation, patient, first-generation, mean, admission]

A controlled, mirror-image study of second generation antipsychotics in the treatment of schizophrenia
Second-generation antipsychotics are now treatments of choice in many countries. In this study, we aimed to compare hospital stay and admissions to hospital in patients switching from first-generation (conventional) to second-generation (atypical) antipsychotics with patients switching from one first-generation drug to another. This was a retrospective, 6-year, controlled mirror-image study conducted in an acute general psychiatry services in an inner-city area. Subjects were consisted of patients diagnosed with schizophrenia or schizoaffective disorder receiving continuous prescription of antipsychotics over atleast a 6-year period between 1994 and 2002. The main outcome measures were number of days spent in hospital and number of admissions to hospital. In 36 patients switched from first to second-generation antipsychotics, total number of days spent in hospital increased, from a mean of 90 days in the 3 years before switching, to a mean of 200 days in the 3 years after (P < 0.001). Mean number of admissions did not change significantly (1.61 before vs. 1.44 after, P = 0.360). In 36 matched control patients, switching between first-generation antipsychotic drugs, mean number of days in hospital fell from 64 to 50 (P = 0.189) and number of admissions was virtually unchanged (1.42 before vs. 1.03 after, P = 0.202). Mean days in hospital were significantly increased in the second-generation antipsychotic group compared with the first-generation antipsychotic (control) group (P < 0.001). Switching from first to second-generation antipsychotics resulted in an important increase in number of days spent in hospital. Switchingfrom one first-generation antipsychotic drug to another did not significantly affect number of days in hospital.
-------------------------------------

10011388_234 - 0.863497830289 - science
[graphene, metal, interaction, electron, surface, transmission]

Interaction of Metals with suspended Graphene observed by Transmission Electron Microscopy
In this Perspective, we present an overview of how different metals interface with suspended graphene, providing a closer look into the metal–graphene interaction by employing high-resolution transmission electron microscopy, especially using high-angle dark field imaging. All studied metals favor sites on the omnipresent hydrocarbon surface contamination rather than on the clean graphene surface and present nonuniform distributions, which never result in continuous films but instead in clusters or nanocrystals, indicating a weak interaction between the metal and graphene. This behavior can be altered to some degree by surface pretreatment (hydrogenation) and high-temperature vacuum annealing. Graphene etching is observed in a scanning transmission electron microscope (STEM) under high vacuum and 60 kV electron beam acceleration voltage conditions for all metals, except for Au. This unusual metal-mediated etching sheds new light on the metal–graphene interaction; it might explain the observed higher frequency of cluster nucleation for certain transition metals and might have implications regarding controlled nanomanipulation, that is, for self-assembly and sculpturing of future graphene-based devices.
-------------------------------------

10016818_234 - 0.891331204927 - science
[butyrolactone, ??, synthesis, afsa, protein, scba, family]

{ScbA} from Streptomyces coelicolor A3(2) has homology to fatty acid synthases and is able to synthesize ??-butyrolactones
??-Butyrolactones} play an important role in the regulation of antibiotic production and differentiation in Streptomyces. However the biosynthetic pathway for these small molecules has not yet been determined, and in vitro synthesis has not been reported. The function of the {AfsA} family of proteins, originally proposed to catalyse ??-butyrolactone synthesis, has been in debate. To clarify the function of the {AfsA} family, and to understand the synthesis of the ??-butyrolactones, we performed in silico analysis of this protein family. {AfsA} proteins consist of two divergent domains, each of which has similarity to the fatty acid synthesis enzymes {FabA} and {FabZ.} The two predicted active sites in {ScbA}, which is the {AfsA} orthologue found in Streptomyces coelicolor, were mutated, and ??-butyrolactone biosynthesis was abolished in all four constructed mutants, strongly suggesting that {ScbA} has enzymic activity. ?? 2007 {SGM.
-------------------------------------

10011317_234 - 0.828533525688 - medicine
[patient, disease, gene, testing, genetic, study, diagnostic]

A paradigm shift in the delivery of services for diagnosis of inherited retinal disease.
OBJECTIVES: Current technologies for delivering gene testing are labour-intensive and expensive. Over the last 3 years, new high-throughput DNA sequencing techniques (next generation sequencing; NGS), with the capability to analyse multiple genes or entire genomes, have been rapidly adopted into research. This study examines the possibility of incorporating NGS into a clinical UK service context. METHODS: The study applied NGS of 105 genes to 50 patients known to be affected by inherited forms of blindness in the setting of a UK National Health Service-accredited diagnostic molecular genetics laboratory. The study assessed the ability of an NGS protocol to identify likely disease-causing genetic variants when compared with current methodologies available through UK diagnostic laboratories. RESULTS: Conventional testing is only applicable to the minority of patients with inherited retinal disease and identifies mutations in fewer than one in four of those patients tested. By contrast, the NGS assay is directed at all patients with such disorders and identifies disease-causing mutations in 50--55%, which is a dramatic increase. This includes patients with apparently 'sporadic' disease, and those for whom clinical management and prognosis are altered as a consequence of defining their disease at a molecular level. CONCLUSIONS: The new NGS approach delivers a step change in the diagnosis of inherited eye disease, provides precise diagnostic information and extends the possibility of targeted treatments including gene therapy. The approach represents an exemplar that illustrates the opportunity that NGS provides for broadening the availability of genetic testing. The technology will be applied to many conditions that are associated with high levels of genetic heterogeneity.
-------------------------------------

10018300_234 - 0.712355981393 - medicine
[airway, infection, rsv, remodelling, inflammation, mouse]

Respiratory syncytial virus infection provokes airway remodelling in allergen-exposed mice in absence of prior allergen sensitization.
BACKGROUND: The mechanisms underlying exacerbation of asthma induced by respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) infection have been extensively studied in human and animal models. However, most of these studies focused on acute inflammation and little is known of its long-term consequences on remodelling of the airway tissue. OBJECTIVE: The aim of the study was to use a murine model of prolonged allergen-induced airway inflammation to investigate the effect of RSV infection on allergic airway inflammation and tissue remodelling. METHODS: We subjected mice to RSV infection before or during the chronic phase of airway challenges with OVA and compared parameters of airway inflammation and remodelling at the end-point of the prolonged allergen-induced airway inflammation protocol. RESULTS: RSV infection did not affect the severity of airway inflammation in any of the groups studied. However, RSV infection provoked airway remodelling in non-sensitized, allergen-challenged mice that did not otherwise develop any of the features of allergic airways disease. Increased collagen synthesis in the lung and thickening of the bronchial basal membrane was observed in non-sensitized allergen-challenged mice only after prior RSV infection. In addition, fibroblast growth factor (FGF)-2 but not TGF-beta(1) was increased in this group following RSV infection. CONCLUSION: Our data show for the first time that RSV infection can prime the lung of mice that are not previously systemically sensitized, to develop airway remodelling in response to allergen upon sole exposure via the airways. Moreover, our results implicate RSV-induced FGF-2 in the remodelling process in vivo.
-------------------------------------

10007025_234 - 0.780808852418 - science
[preference, acid, amino, conductor, screw-sense, helical, insulator, domain]

Chemical communication: conductors and insulators of screw-sense preference between helical oligo(aminoisobutyric acid) domains.
(1)H NMR studies quantify the abilities of achiral amino acids to communicate a left-handed screw-sense preference from one helical Aib(4) domain to another: certain quaternary amino acids (e.g. Ac(6)c) act as effective conductors of conformational preference while others (e.g. diphenylglycine) acts as insulators.
-------------------------------------

10010042_234 - 0.735797015427 - technology_and_computing
[cilk, programming, system, slam, core, cache, functional, cmp, parallel]

Architectural Support for Exploiting Fine Grain Parallelism
The advent of multi-core processors, particularly with projections that numbers of cores will continue to increase, has focused attention on parallel programming. It is widely recognized that current programming techniques, including those that are used for scientific parallel programming, will not allow the easy formulation of general purpose applications. An area which is receiving interest is the use of programming styles which are side-effect free. Previous work on parallel functional programming demonstrated the potential of this to permit the easy exploitation of parallelism. Recent systems like Cilk use conventional languages such as C but encourage the use of a largely functional style (side-effect free) when writing programs. An important part of the Cilk runtime is a system to balance the usage of cores. In this paper we present SLAM (Spreading Load with Active Messages), a dynamic load balancing system based on functional language evaluation techniques. We show that SLAM, provided with appropriate hardware support, significantly outperforms the Cilk system. We evaluated our system using tiled CMPs with private and shared L2 caches separately. Our results show that, for the benchmarks evaluated, SLAM outperforms Cilk by 28% on average when using 32-core CMPs with private L2 caches. For the case of the CMPs with shared L2 caches, SLAM was on average 21% faster than Cilk when using 32 cores and 62% faster when using 64 cores.
-------------------------------------

10007516_234 - 0.705028606722 - science
[dna, tumour, cancer, methylation, biomarker, gene]

DNA methylation in circulating tumour DNA as a biomarker for cancer.
Free circulating DNA, which is thought to be derived from the primary tumour, can be detected in the blood of patients with cancer. Detection of genetic and epigenetic alteration in this tumour DNA offers a potential source of development of prognostic and predictive biomarkers for cancer. One such change is DNA methylation of the promotor region of tumour suppressor genes. This causes down regulation of tumour suppressor gene expression, a frequent event in carcinogenesis. Hypermethylation of the promotor region of a number of genes has been detected in many tumour types and more recently these changes have been detected in circulating tumour DNA. This review will summarise the literature detailing DNA methylation in circulating tumour DNA and discuss some of the current controversies and technical challenges facing its use as a potential biomarker for cancer.
-------------------------------------

10007205_234 - 0.864036519662 - science
[chordate, decay, character, fossil, cambrian, bias, datum, difficulty, loss, interpretation]

Non-random decay of chordate characters causes bias in fossil interpretation
Exceptional preservation of soft-bodied Cambrian chordates provides our only direct information on the origin of vertebrates. Fossil chordates from this interval offer crucial insights into how the distinctive body plan of vertebrates evolved, but reading this pre-biomineralization fossil record is fraught with difficulties, leading to controversial and contradictory interpretations. The cause of these difficulties is taphonomic: we lack data on when and how important characters change as they decompose, resulting in a lack of constraint on anatomical interpretation and a failure to distinguish phylogenetic absence of characters from loss through decay. Here we show, from experimental decay of amphioxus and ammocoetes, that loss of chordate characters during decay is non-random: the more phylogenetically informative are the most labile, whereas plesiomorphic characters are decay resistant. The taphonomic loss of synapomorphies and relatively higher preservation potential of chordate plesiomorphies will thus result in bias towards wrongly placing fossils on the chordate stem. Application of these data to Cathaymyrus (Cambrian period of China) and Metaspriggina (Cambrian period of Canada) highlights the difficulties: these fossils cannot be placed reliably in the chordate or vertebrate stem because they could represent the decayed remains of any non-biomineralized, total-group chordate. Preliminary data suggest that this decay filter also affects other groups of organisms and that 'stem-ward slippage' may be a widespread but currently unrecognized bias in our understanding of the early evolution of a number of phyla.
-------------------------------------

10005582_234 - 0.949278726207 - medicine
[patient, symptom, irritable, syndrome, bowel]

Non-colonic features of irritable bowel syndrome.
In 100 patients with irritable bowel syndrome a wide variety of non-gastrointestinal symptoms were significantly more common than in a group of 100 age, sex, and social class matched controls. Nocturia, frequency and urgency of micturition, incomplete bladder emptying, back pain, an unpleasant taste in the mouth, a constant feeling of tiredness and in women dyspareunia were particularly prominent (p less than 0.001). With reference to non-colonic gastrointestinal symptoms nausea, vomiting, dysphagia and early satiety were very common (p less than 0.0001). This symptom diversity was observed irrespective of whether the patient had a psychiatric disorder or not. Patients smoked more than controls (p = 0.02) drank more caffeine containing drinks (p = 0.03) and 26% had taken at least one week off work in the previous 12 months. Thirty three per cent of patients had a family history of irritable bowel syndrome. Cognisance of these diverse symptoms may prevent referral to the wrong medical specialty and inappropriate investigation. They may also be indicative of a much more diffuse disorder of smooth muscle than has previously been appreciated.
-------------------------------------

10006955_234 - 0.819492689563 - science
[ischemia, human, model, ischemic, ventricular, wave, cell]

Modeling of electrophysiology and simulation of ECG under ischemic condition in human ventricular tissue.
In this paper, to analyze the functional influence of ischemia on cardiac cell electrical activity and subsequently on ventricular electrical wave conduction, a human ventricular ischemic model was developed, which took into account three major pathophysiological components of ischemias hyperkalaemia, acidosis, and anoxia. This model simulated the action potential (AP) propagations of endocardial, midmycardial and epicardial cells with different levels of ischemia, and the influence of each factor on cell AP was analyzed. Finally the ECG waveform under ischemia was quantified by using a 2D model of human left ventricular tissue based on the anatomical structure of human heart. The experimental results showed that under ischemia action potential durations (APD) were reduced. In most cases, the larger the size of ischemic region or the more severe the ischemic level, the more dramatic the changes in the amplitude of ST-T wave were observed. For the three components of ischemia, hyperkalaemia was the dominant contributor to ST-T wave changes, which was in agreement with the results obtained on animal models.
-------------------------------------

10008602_234 - 0.788460137726 - science
[dc, skin, response, immune, cell, cutaneous, assay, dc-based, use, function]

Dendritic cells and the assessment in vitro of skin sensitizing potential.
It is now well established that dendritic cells (DC) play pivotal roles in the initiation and orchestration of adaptive immune responses, including cutaneous immune responses to chemical allergens that drive the acquisition of skin sensitization. It is not unexpected, therefore, that a large number, and wide variety, of proposed approaches for the identification of skin sensitizing chemicals in vitro are based upon the use of cultured DC or DC-like cells. The use of DC in this context is legitimate. However, with our rapidly increasing understanding of the diversity of cutaneous DC with respect to both phenotype and function, it is timely now to review briefly the potential limitations and interpretive difficulties that are associated with the use of DC-based assays. Among the important considerations are the fact that chemical-induced changes in the characteristics and function of cultured DC will not necessarily reflect accurately the events that that support the development of skin sensitization in vivo. In addition, most DC-based assays are predicated on a view that cutaneous DC have as their primary function the initiation of adaptive immune responses. However, it is now appreciated that cutaneous DC, and in particular epidermal Langerhans cells (LC), may also play important immunoregulatory roles that serve to limit and contain skin immune responses. Notwithstanding these considerations there is reason to believe that at least some in vitro DC-based assays are of value, and indeed some are currently the subject of a formal validation process. However, it is appropriate that such assays are configured and interpreted carefully, and with an appreciation of the complexity of DC biology.
-------------------------------------

10005167_234 - 0.812464914972 - technology_and_computing
[fpga, 3-d, heterogeneous, design]

A Novel Framework for Exploring 3-D FPGAs with Heterogeneous Interconnect Fabric
A heterogeneous interconnect architecture can be a useful approach for the design of 3-D FPGAs. A methodology to investigate heterogeneous interconnection schemes for 3-D FPGAs under different 3-D fabrication technologies is proposed. Application of the proposed methodology on benchmark circuits demonstrates an improvement in delay, power consumption, and total wire-length of approximately 41&percnt;, 32&percnt;, and 36&percnt;, respectively, as compared to 2-D FPGAs. These improvements are additional to reducing the number of interlayer connections. The fewer interlayer connections are traded off for a higher yield. An area model to evaluate this trade-off is presented. Results indicate that a heterogeneous 3-D FPGA requires 37&percnt; less area as compared to a homogeneous 3-D FPGA. Consequently, the heterogeneous FPGAs can exhibit a higher manufacturing yield. A design toolset is also developed to support the design and exploration of various performance metrics for the proposed 3-D FPGAs.
-------------------------------------

10009973_234 - 0.749770850817 - science
[strain, mouse, serum]

Production of germ tubes by virulent and attenuated strains of Candida albicans.
Two strains (no. 19321 and no. 19273) of Candida albicans that were obtained from patients with vaginal thrush and were virulent for mice formed germ tubes after incubation in fresh mouse serum and mouse kidney extract more rapidly and to a greater extent than did two strains (no. 22114 and no. 21462) that were isolated from patients with transient candidemia and were attenuated for mice. After incubation in fresh human serum, the strain differences in germination were not as marked although the pattern was similar. Synchronous cultures of strains no. 19321 and no. 22114 showed differences similar to those shown by asynchronous cultures in the mouse and human sera and in the mouse kidney extract. The viability of the strains was maintained in all three types of media; thus, nonspecific humoral defense mechanisms had little effect on the attenuated strain.
-------------------------------------

10015773_234 - 0.739888241655 - science
[cloud, emerald-1, structure, microphysical, cirrus, overview]

An overview of the microphysical structure of cirrus clouds observed during EMERALD-1
Part A
-------------------------------------

10017048_234 - 0.92594136127 - medicine
[cerebral, dementia, embolus, patient, vascular, alzheimer, score, disease, deterioration, mean]

Association of Cerebral Emboli With Accelerated Cognitive Deterioration in Alzheimer's Disease and Vascular Dementia
OBJECTIVE: Spontaneous cerebral emboli occur frequently in patients with Alzheimer's disease and vascular dementia. The authors investigated the effect of cerebral emboli on cognitive and functional decline in both Alzheimer's disease and vascular dementia patients over a 2-year period. METHOD: Cerebral emboli entering the middle cerebral arteries were counted at baseline and every 6 months over the following 18 months using transcranial Doppler ultrasonography in 144 patients with dementia (Alzheimer's disease, N=84; vascular dementia, N=60). Deterioration in cognition was measured every 6 months over 2 years using the Alzheimer's Disease Assessment Scale-Cognitive (ADAS-Cog), the Mini-Mental State Examination (to assess cognition), the Interview for Deterioration in Daily Living Activities in Dementia (to assess function), and the Neuropsychiatric Inventory (to assess behavioral and psychological symptoms). The relationship between cerebral emboli and progression of dementia was analyzed using longitudinal regression modeling, adjusted for age, sex, diagnostic subtype, age at onset of dementia, and significant vascular risk factors. RESULTS: Spontaneous cerebral emboli were detected in 63 (44%) dementia patients, 36 (43%) Alzheimer's disease patients, and 27 (45%) vascular dementia patients. ADAS-Cog scores revealed faster deterioration in cognitive functioning in patients with cerebral emboli over 2 years, with a mean increase in score of 15.4 in these patients, compared with only 6.0 for those without cerebral emboli. Similarly, Interview for Deterioration in Daily Living Activities in Dementia scores revealed more rapid deterioration in those with cerebral emboli, with a mean increase in score of 59.0 in these patients, compared with 17.9 for those without cerebral emboli. Neuropsychiatric Inventory scores also indicated faster decline in patients with cerebral emboli, with a mean increase in score of 12.0 in these patients, compared with a mean decrease in score of -3.8 for patients in whom no emboli were detected. CONCLUSIONS: Spontaneous cerebral emboli predict more rapid progression of dementia over 2 years in both Alzheimer's disease and vascular dementia. Clinical trials on the inhibition of cerebral emboli in the prevention and treatment of dementia are needed.
-------------------------------------

10009981_234 - 0.874685210172 - science
[candida, enzyme, antigen, immunoassay, serum, diagnosis, infection, reaction, invasive]

Diagnosis of invasive candidosis by enzyme immunoassay of serum antigen.
Enzyme immunoassay was used to measure Candida albicans-related antigen in sera of rabbits and mice infected with C albicans. A range of heterologous antigens tested gave no cross reactions. Of the three patients who were investigated and gave positive reactions, two were confirmed as having deep candida infections. Enzyme immunoassay is efficient, simple, and sensitive, and may prove valuable in the early diagnosis of invasive candida infections.
-------------------------------------

10004185_234 - 0.779664824794 - science
[volatility, kinetic, equilibrium, thermogram, aerosol, uncertainty, evaporation, analysis, curve, model]

A modeling approach to evaluate the uncertainty in estimating the evaporation behaviour and volatility of organic aerosols
The uncertainty in determining the volatility behaviour of organic particles from thermograms using calibration curves and a kinetic model has been evaluated. In the analysis, factors such as re-condensation, departure from equilibrium and analysis methodology were considered as potential sources of uncertainty in deriving volatility distribution from thermograms obtained with currently used thermodenuder designs. The previously found empirical relationship between C{*} (saturation concentration) and T-50 (temperature at which 50\% of aerosol mass evaporates) was theoretically interpreted and tested to infer volatility distributions from experimental thermograms. The presented theoretical analysis shows that this empirical equation is in fact an equilibrium formulation, whose applicability is lessened as measurements deviate from equilibrium. While using a calibration curve between C{*} and T-50 to estimate volatility properties was found to hold at equilibrium, significant underestimation was obtained under kinetically-controlled evaporation conditions. Because thermograms obtained at ambient aerosol loading levels are most likely to show departure from equilibrium, the application of a kinetic evaporation model is more suitable for inferring volatility properties of atmospheric samples than the calibration curve approach; however, the kinetic model analysis implies significant uncertainty, due to its sensitivity to the assumption of `effective' net kinetic evaporation and condensation coefficients. The influence of re-condensation on thermograms from the thermodenuder designs under study was found to be highly dependent on the particular experimental condition, with a significant potential to affect volatility estimations for aerosol mass loadings > 50 mu g m(-3) and with increasing effective kinetic coefficient for condensation and decreasing particle size. These results show that the geometry of current thermodenuder systems should be modified to prevent re-condensation.
-------------------------------------

10006912_234 - 0.928690523999 - science
[pf-4, monocyte, macrophage, burst, cell]

Platelet factor 4/CXCL4 induces phagocytosis and the generation of reactive oxygen metabolites in mononuclear phagocytes independently of Gi protein activation or intracellular calcium transients.
Platelet factor 4 (PF-4), a platelet-derived CXC chemokine, is known to prevent human monocytes from apoptosis and to promote differentiation of these cells into HLA-DR(-) macrophages. In this study, we investigated the role of PF-4 in the control of acute monocyte proinflammatory responses involved in the direct combat of microbial invaders. We show that PF-4 increases monocyte phagocytosis and provokes a strong formation of oxygen radicals but lacks a chemotactic activity in these cells. Compared with FMLP, PF-4-induced oxidative burst was later in its onset but was remarkably longer in its duration (lasting for up to 60 min). Furthermore, in PF-4-prestimulated cells, FMLP- as well as RANTES-induced burst responses became synergistically enhanced. As we could show, PF-4-mediated oxidative burst in monocytes does not involve Gi proteins, elevation of intracellular free calcium concentrations, or binding to CXCR3B, a novel PF-4 receptor recently discovered on endothelial cells. Moreover, we found that PF-4 acts on macrophages in a dual manner. On the one hand, very similar to GM-CSF or M-CSF, PF-4 treatment of monocytes generates macrophages with a high capacity for unspecific phagocytosis. On the other hand, short term priming of GM-CSF-induced human macrophages with PF-4 substantially increases their capability for particle ingestion and oxidative burst. A comparable effect was also observed in murine bone marrow-derived macrophages, indicating cross-reactivity of human PF-4 between both species. Taken together, PF-4 may play a crucial role in the induction and maintenance of an unspecific immune response.
-------------------------------------

10004882_234 - 0.90578490863 - medicine
[clozapine, patient, period, study, reduction]

The effectiveness of clozapine: a controlled, population-based, mirror-image study Abstract. 11th Biennial Winter Workshop on Schizophrenia, Davos, Switzerland.
A retrospective cohort study, with a mirror-image design, was used to measure inpatient service utilisation in 63 consecutive patients started on clozapine from a geographical catchment area, compared to a control group matched for previous inpatient service use. An intent to treat analysis, including those patients (n=28), who discontinued clozapine during the study period, showed a significant reduction in number of admissions and total time spent in hospital in the 2 years following clozapine initiation, compared to the previous 2 years and to the follow-up period inthe control group. This translated into a reduction of £7,300 in hospitalisation costs per patient started on clozapine, over the 2-year period. In those patients who continued clozapine treatment for the whole of the 2-year period, there was a two-thirds reduction in number of admissions and total time spent in hospital, compared to no change in the clozapine discontinuers. These findings suggest that clozapine is a clinically and cost effective intervention for severe schizophrenia in routine NHS settings.
-------------------------------------

10015710_234 - 0.732639254511 - technology_and_computing
[grid, technique, monitoring, integration, authorship, equal, responsibility, stream, alphabetical]

Stream integration techniques for Grid monitoring
(Alphabetical authorship, equal responsibility)
-------------------------------------

10009732_234 - 0.899483791778 - medicine
[patient, ifi, gm, sct]

Prevention and monitoring of invasive fungal infections in pediatric patients with cancer and hematologic disorders.
BACKGROUND: The occurrence of invasive fungal infection (IFIs) in a pediatric hematology/oncology unit after renovation of the ventilation system, and initiating routine azole antifungal prophylaxis was monitored. In addition, the value of serial screening for Aspergillus galactomannan (GM) for diagnosing invasive aspergillosis was assessed. PROCEDURE: A total of 98 consecutive high-risk pediatric patients were prospectively surveyed for signs of IFI and weekly monitored for serum GM. The data was not made available to treating physicians. RESULTS: Only 2 patients had proven and 27 possible IFI based on the European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer/Mycoses Study Group definitions. The incidence of proven IFI was 1/31 (3.2%) in the allogeneic stem cell transplant (SCT) (Aspergillus spp), 0/26 in the autologous SCT, and 1/60 (1.6%) in the induction therapy group (C. krusei). GM was detected at least in one tested sample in 12/98 patients (12.2%), in five patients in two or more sequential samples. In the latter group, IFI was proven in one patient and could not be excluded in the others. Four of the five patients belonged to the 31 allogeneic and one to the 26 autologous SCT patients. In patients with only one positive GM test none developed signs of IFI and only one received empirical amphotericin B. CONCLUSIONS: With the currently used preventative and prophylactic measures, IFI is uncommon in children with high-risk for infection. Regular screening for GM could be useful among allogeneic SCT patients and two positive samples should prompt further investigative procedures and pre-emptive antifungal therapy.
-------------------------------------

10011834_234 - 0.821699353004 - medicine
[ustekinumab, pasi, psoriasis, patient, treatment]

Practical experience of ustekinumab in the treatment of psoriasis: experience from a multicentre, retrospective case cohort study across the U.K. and Ireland.
BACKGROUND: There are limited data on the use of ustekinumab outside of clinical trials. OBJECTIVES: To assess the efficacy and safety of ustekinumab in patients with severe psoriasis attending 10 dermatology centres in the U.K. and Ireland. METHODS: A retrospective case-note review of 129 patients with psoriasis treated with ustekinumab. RESULTS: Baseline Psoriasis Area and Severity Index (PASI) was 22·9±10·1 (mean±SD). After 16weeks of treatment with ustekinumab PASI 75 (75% reduction in PASI) was observed in 63·0% (n=80/127) of patients, although four patients required concomitant therapy at the 16-week time point. Previous biologic use did show a small, non-significant trend towards treatment failure. A PASI 75 response was seen in 29·4% (n=5/17) of individuals weighing 90-100kg and treated with the standard 45mg ustekinumab dose compared with PASI 75 of 70·3%, 71·4%, 75·0% and 55·6% for weight groups <80, 80-90, 100-110 and >110kg, respectively (P=0·024). Ustekinumab therapy was well tolerated; serious adverse events were observed in 2·3% (n=3/129) of patients. CONCLUSIONS: Ustekinumab is a novel biologic agent for psoriasis. When used in everyday clinical practice it demonstrates high levels of short-term therapeutic efficacy with an acceptable short-term safety profile.
-------------------------------------

10005260_234 - 0.862818250274 - science
[skin, tsg-6, scar, keloid, unscarred, normal]

Characterization of hyaluronan and TSG-6 in skin scarring: differential distribution in keloid scars, normal scars and unscarred skin.
BACKGROUND: Hyaluronan (HA) is a major component of the extracellular matrix (ECM) with increased synthesis during tissue repair. Tumour necrosis factor-stimulated gene-6 (TSG-6) is known to catalyze the covalent transfer of heavy chains (HC1 and HC2) from inter-α-inhibitor (IαI) onto HA, and resultant HC•HA complexes have been implicated in physiological and pathological processes related to remodelling and inflammation. OBJECTIVE: The aims of this study were to determine the expression of HA, TSG-6 and the IαI polypeptides in unscarred skin, normal scars and keloid scars. METHODS: Formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded sections of unscarred skin, normal scars and keloid scars were prepared from patient samples collected during scar revision surgery. Haematoxylin and eosin, as well as immunofluorescent staining for HA, TSG-6 and the three polypeptide chains of IαI (i.e. HC1, HC2 and bikunin) were performed. RESULTS: All skin types stained positive for TSG-6, HC1, HC2 and bikunin, associated with keratinocytes, fibroblasts and skin appendages all in close proximity to HA. Keloid lesions showed altered HA organization patterns compared with unscarred skin and normal scars. TSG-6 staining was significantly more intense in the epidermis compared with the dermis of all sample types. There was a significant reduction in TSG-6 levels within keloid lesions compared with the dermis of unscarred skin (P=0.017). CONCLUSION: TSG-6 is expressed in unscarred skin, where its close association with HA and IαI could give rise to TSG-6-mediated HC•HA formation within this tissue. A reduction in the beneficial effects of TSG-6, caused by diminished protein levels in keloid lesions, could contribute to this abnormal scarring process.
-------------------------------------

10003287_234 - 0.908845372382 - science
[human, spermidine, hf, cell, polyamine, hair, epithelial, stem, expression, growth]

Spermidine promotes human hair growth and is a novel modulator of human epithelial stem cell functions.
BACKGROUND: Rapidly regenerating tissues need sufficient polyamine synthesis. Since the hair follicle (HF) is a highly proliferative mini-organ, polyamines may also be important for normal hair growth. However, the role of polyamines in human HF biology and their effect on HF epithelial stem cells in situ remains largely unknown. METHODS AND FINDINGS: We have studied the effects of the prototypic polyamine, spermidine (0.1-1 µM), on human scalp HFs and human HF epithelial stem cells in serum-free organ culture. Under these conditions, spermidine promoted hair shaft elongation and prolonged hair growth (anagen). Spermidine also upregulated expression of the epithelial stem cell-associated keratins K15 and K19, and dose-dependently modulated K15 promoter activity in situ and the colony forming efficiency, proliferation and K15 expression of isolated human K15-GFP+ cells in vitro. Inhibiting the rate-limiting enzyme of polyamine synthesis, ornithine decarboyxlase (ODC), downregulated intrafollicular K15 expression. In primary human epidermal keratinocytes, spermidine slightly promoted entry into the S/G2-M phases of the cell cycle. By microarray analysis of human HF mRNA extracts, spermidine upregulated several key target genes implicated e.g. in the control of cell adherence and migration (POP3), or endoplasmic reticulum and mitochondrial functions (SYVN1, NACA and SLC25A3). Excess spermidine may restrict further intrafollicular polyamine synthesis by inhibiting ODC gene and protein expression in the HF's companion layer in situ. CONCLUSIONS: These physiologically and clinically relevant data provide the first direct evidence that spermidine is a potent stimulator of human hair growth and a previously unknown modulator of human epithelial stem cell biology.
-------------------------------------

10008200_234 - 0.759154236278 - science
[density, volumetric, breast, assessment, area-based, visual, measure, average, risk]

Volumetric and Area-Based Breast Density Measurement in a Large Clinical Study
Mammographic density, defined as the percentage area of the breast in a mammogram that is comprised of fibroglandular tissue, is associated with risk of developing breast cancer. However, measures of mammographic density are subject to variation in the imaging process and in the assessments of observ-ers. Automatic volumetric measures of breast density remove much of this vari-ability, but their association with risk remains to be validated. We present den-sity measurements produced by area-based visual assessment via a visual ana-logue scale (VAS) and by volumetric assessment software (QuantraTM, Holog-ic Inc.) for digital mammograms of participants in a large-scale clinical study.VAS results were produced independently by two expert observers and av-eraged to give a final score. The distributions of average VAS scores (n = 22 327) and QuantraTM densities (n = 11 653) are shown by histograms and box plots. The average area-based density was 24.5% (SD 15.7%) and the average volumetric density was 17.0% (SD 6.0%). Inter-observer variability in visual area-based estimation is examined by a scatter plot matrix. It is inappropriate to directly compare area-based and volumetric measures of percentage breast density, since they are measuring different properties of the breast. Automatic volumetric assessment avoids the inter-observer variability shown in visual assessment, but work remains in establishing the association between volumetric measures and breast cancer risk.
-------------------------------------

10011982_234 - 0.76480475291 - technology_and_computing
[circuit, model, voltage, network, breaker, current, prestrike]

Modeling of MV vacuum circuit breakers with prestrike characteristics for simulation of transient studies for wind farm networks
AbstractVacuum Circuit Breakers are widely used in medium voltage (MV) networks for making and breaking of circuits under normal or abnormal circuit condition. The making or switching-on operation of circuit breaker during energization of wind farm networks can cause switching transients which might damage the insulation structure of cables, transformers and turbine generators. The repetitive impact on the systems without remedial action may cause premature ageing of the above mentioned components. The aim of this paper is to model medium voltage vacuum circuit breakers in order to simulate prestrike phenomena accurately. A three phase network and circuit model will be developed. It will be developed in ATP environment using MODELS, a symbolic language implemented in the ATPDraw software package. The model includes the derivatives of voltage and current, high frequency chopping current, breakdown characteristic of contact gaps and travelling time of closing contacts. The validation of the simulation results in terms of voltage and current under prestrike conditions will be also presented. The proposed circuit breaker model can be incorporated in any study related to development of computer based testing facilities for testing protection schemes, protective numerical algorithms etc.
-------------------------------------

10007801_234 - 0.855246558969 - science
[hif-1, tumour, cancer, metabolite, cell, effect, metabolic]

Time-of-flight SIMS as a novel approach to unlocking the hypoxic properties of cancer
It is known that hypoxia-inducible factor 1 (HIF-1) activity results in the coordinated up-regulation of a large number of proteins that facilitate cell survival in tumours; however, the effect of HIF-1 on cancer metabolism is less well characterised. With knowledge of the specific effect of HIF-1 on cancer metabolism, biomarkers could be identified for which new drugs could be targeted. Time-of-flight secondary ion mass spectrometry (ToF-SIMS) offers the potential to analyse intact cells in situ and has a mass spectral coverage that is applicable to metabolic profiling. It has been used to analyse the effects of HIF-1 on multicellular tumour models. Multicellular tumour spheroids (MTSs) have been cultured from human colon carcinoma cells with and without the expression of HIF-1, and the surface of the cross sections of each MTS has been analysed. Because metabolic profiling is an emerging field in ToF-SIMS, there is a requirement to determine which metabolites can be detected using this technique and which of those can be identified in complex mixtures within biological samples. For this, a selection of metabolites have been analysed, and the ToF-SIMS standard spectra acquired have been used to localise metabolites in MTS sections. The comparison of metabolic profiles of MTSs with and without the expression of HIF-1 has elucidated potential biomarkers for tumour survival in hypoxia, some of which may be HIF-1 regulated.
-------------------------------------

10011726_234 - 0.705288497602 - science
[sub-variant, tumour, carcinoma]

FTIR microspectroscopy of selected rare diverse sub-variants of carcinoma of the  urinary bladder
Urothelial carcinomas of the bladder are a heterogeneous group of tumours,although some histological sub-variants are rare and sparsely reported in theliterature. Diagnosis of sub-variants from conventional urothelial carcinoma can be challenging, as they may mimic the morphology of other malignancies or benign tumours and therefore their distinction is important. For the first time, thespectral pathology of some of these sub-variants has been documented by infrared microspectroscopy and an attempt made to profile their biochemistry. It isimportant not only to identify and separate the cancer-associated epithelialtissue spectra from common tissue features such as stroma or blood, but also todetect the signatures of tumour sub-variants. As shown, their spectroscopicsignals can change dramatically as a consequence of differentiation. Examplecases are discussed and compared with histological evaluations.
-------------------------------------

10017776_234 - 0.906978338088 - science
[surface, linker, immobilisation, different, s-tritylated, glycoarray, mannoside, polystyrene]

Dual purpose S-trityl-linkers for glycoarray fabrication on both polystyrene and gold
There is a wide range of immobilisation reactions to tether substrates to a variety of surfaces for array-based analysis. Most of these immobilisation strategies are speciﬁc for a particular surface and require an additional linker to be attached to the substrate or the surface. Furthermore, the analysis of functionalised surfaces is often restricted to certain analytical techniques and therefore, different immobilisation strategies for different surfaces are desirable. Here we have tested an S-tritylated linker for non-covalent or covalent immobilisation of mannosides to polystyrene or gold surfaces. S-Tritylated mannosides with varying linkers were readily synthesised and used to add to biorepulsive maleimideterminated preformed SAMs after in situ deprotection of the S-trityl group. In addition, S-tritylated mannosides themselves formed stable glycoarrays on polystyrene microtiter plates. The glycoarrays were successfully analysed by MALDI-ToF mass spectrometry, SPR spectroscopy, and interrogated with GFP-transfected Escherichia coli cells. This work has shown that a dual purpose linker can be used on multiple surfaces to form arrays allowing for different testing as well as analytical approaches.
-------------------------------------

10007865_234 - 0.841824966625 - medicine
[ctc, patient, nsclc, stage]

Evaluation and Prognostic Significance of Circulating Tumor Cells in Patients With Non–Small-Cell Lung Cancer
PURPOSE: Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer-related death worldwide. Non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) lacks validated biomarkers to predict treatment response. This study investigated whether circulating tumor cells (CTCs) are detectable in patients with NSCLC and what their ability might be to provide prognostic information and/or early indication of patient response to conventional therapy. PATIENTS AND METHODS: In this single-center prospective study, blood samples for CTC analysis were obtained from 101 patients with previously untreated, stage III or IV NSCLC both before and after administration of one cycle of standard chemotherapy. CTCs were measured using a semiautomated, epithelial cell adhesion molecule-based immunomagnetic technique. RESULTS: The number of CTCs in 7.5 mL of blood was higher in patients with stage IV NSCLC (n = 60; range, 0 to 146) compared with patients with stage IIIB (n = 27; range, 0 to 3) or IIIA disease (n = 14; no CTCs detected). In univariate analysis, progression-free survival was 6.8 v 2.4 months with P < .001, and overall survival (OS) was 8.1 v 4.3 months with P < .001 for patients with fewer than five CTCs compared with five or more CTCs before chemotherapy, respectively. In multivariate analysis, CTC number was the strongest predictor of OS (hazard ratio HR, 7.92; 95% CI, 2.85 to 22.01; P < .001), and the point estimate of the HR was increased with incorporation of a second CTC sample that was taken after one cycle of chemotherapy (HR, 15.65; 95% CI, 3.63 to 67.53; P < .001). CONCLUSION: CTCs are detectable in patients with stage IV NSCLC and are a novel prognostic factor for this disease. Further validation is warranted before routine clinical application.
-------------------------------------

10011649_234 - 0.748708686186 - science
[cell, p53-mutated, nutlin-3, subline, ukf-nb-3rnutlin, ukf-nb-3, mutation, ??, cancer]

Adaptation of cancer cells from different entities to the MDM2 inhibitor nutlin-3 results in the emergence of p53-mutated multi-drug-resistant cancer cells
Six p53 wild-type cancer cell lines from infrequently p53-mutated entities (neuroblastoma, rhabdomyosarcoma, and melanoma) were continuously exposed to increasing concentrations of the murine double minute 2 inhibitor nutlin-3, resulting in the emergence of nutlin-3-resistant, p53-mutated sublines displaying a multi-drug resistance phenotype. Only 2 out of 28 sublines adapted to various cytotoxic drugs harboured p53 mutations. Nutlin-3-adapted UKF-NB-3 cells (UKF-NB-3rNutlin 10 ??M, harbouring a G245C mutation) were also radiation resistant. Analysis of UKF-NB-3 and UKF-NB-3rNutlin 10 ??M cells by RNA interference experiments and lentiviral transduction of wild-type p53 into p53-mutated UKF-NB-3rNutlin 10 ??M cells revealed that the loss of p53 function contributes to the multi-drug resistance of UKF-NB-3rNutlin 10 ??M cells. Bioinformatics PANTHER pathway analysis based on microarray measurements of mRNA abundance indicated a substantial overlap in the signalling pathways differentially regulated between UKF-NB-3rNutlin 10 ??M and UKF-NB-3 and between UKF-NB-3 and its cisplatin-, doxorubicin-, or vincristineresistant sublines. Repeated nutlin-3 adaptation of neuroblastoma cells resulted in sublines harbouring various p53 mutations with high frequency. A p53 wild-type single cell-derived UKF-NB-3 clone was adapted to nutlin-3 in independent experiments. Eight out of ten resulting sublines were p53-mutated harbouring six different p53 mutations. This indicates that nutlin-3 induces de novo p53 mutations not initially present in the original cell population. Therefore, nutlin-3-treated cancer patients should be carefully monitored for the emergence of p53-mutated, multi-drug-resistant cells. ?? 2011 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved.
-------------------------------------

10010344_234 - 0.88099796512 - science
[metabolism, analysis]

Metabolomic analysis of a synthetic metabolic switch in Streptomyces coelicolor A3(2)
The global analysis of metabolism by liquid chromatography coupled to mass spectrometry is often hampered by a large amount of biological and technical variability. Here, we introduce an experimental and analytical strategy that can produce robust metabolome profiles in the face of this challenge. By applying a new computational approach based on concordance analysis to an extremely large number of analytical replicates, we are able to show that the overexpression of an antisense non-coding {RNA} targeting glutamine synthetase I results in a major reorganization of the metabolism of Streptomyces coelicolor, the model species of antibiotic-producing bacteria. We identified 97 metabolites with statistically significant reproducible dynamic behavior across the time series. The observed metabolic changes are very rapid, specific and widespread across metabolism, but focus on the nitrogen assimilation pathways. Our results demonstrate the power of highly replicated experimental designs for the robust characterization of metabolite dynamics. The identified global rearrangement of metabolism suggests the usefulness of {RNA} interference as an efficient strategy to manipulate the physiology of bacteria with wider biotechnological applicability in microorganisms. ?? 2011 {WILEY-VCH} Verlag {GmbH} \& Co. {KGaA}, Weinheim.
-------------------------------------

10007007_234 - 0.876543123975 - science
[aerosol, concentration, particle, observation, growth]

Aerosol observations and growth rates downwind of the anvil of a deep tropical thunderstorm
We present a case study of Aitken and accumulation mode aerosol observed downwind of the anvil of a deep tropical thunderstorm. The measurements were made by condensation nuclei counters flown on the Egrett high-altitude aircraft from Darwin during the ACTIVE campaign, in monsoon conditions producing widespread convection over land and ocean. Maximum measured concentrations of aerosol with diameter greater than 10 nm were 25 000 cm(-3) (STP). By calculating back-trajectories from the observations, and projecting onto infrared satellite images, the time since the air exited cloud was estimated. In this way a time scale of about 3 hours was derived for the Aitken aerosol concentration to reach its peak. We examine the hypothesis that the growth in aerosol concentrations can be explained by production of sulphuric acid from SO2 followed by particle nucleation and coagulation. Estimates of the sulphuric acid production rate show that the observations are only consistent with this hypothesis if the particles coagulate to sizes > 10 nm much more quickly than is suggested by current theory. Alternatively, other condensible gases (possibly organic) drive the growth of aerosol particles in the TTL.
-------------------------------------

10004839_234 - 0.743732125959 - technology_and_computing
[system, power, method, placement, test]

Optimal placement of Phasor Measurement Units to Improve Parallel Power System Restoration
This paper proposes a new method for optimal placement of Phasor Measurement Units (PMUs) across the weak areas of the power system to monitor the status of the boundary buses during Parallel Power System Restoration (PPSR). The proposed PMU placement method is based on an Integer Linear Programming (ILP) methodology. For validation purposes, the proposed method is implemented across the weak areas of the following two test systems: New England 39-bus test system and IEEE 118-bus test system.
-------------------------------------

10011826_234 - 0.94725063164 - medicine
[patient, rt, chemotherapy, response, consolidation, pf]

Consolidation radiotherapy in patients with advanced Hodgkin's lymphoma: survival data from the UKLG LY09 randomized controlled trial (ISRCTN97144519).
PURPOSE: This study analyzed the outcomes of nonrandomized consolidation radiotherapy (RT) given after chemotherapy in the initial treatment of advanced Hodgkin's lymphoma (HL). The results were collected prospectively within a randomized controlled trial of induction chemotherapy. PATIENTS AND METHODS: Patients were randomly assigned between doxorubicin, bleomycin, vinblastine, and dacarbazine and one of two prespecified multidrug regimens. At least six cycles of chemotherapy were planned, with up to eight for patients showing slower response. Involved-field RT was recommended for incomplete response to chemotherapy or bulk disease at presentation. The primary outcome measure was progression-free survival (PFS), landmarked from the end of chemotherapy. RESULTS: Among 807 patients randomly assigned, 702 achieved objective response. Postchemotherapy RT for consolidation was reported in 300 (43%). With median follow-up of 6.9 years, 161 PFS events and 83 deaths were reported. Baseline characteristics showed more patients with bulk disease having RT (190 63% v 111 28%) and only partial response after chemotherapy (150 50% v 36 9%). Other baseline characteristics were similar. PFS was superior for patients having RT (hazard ratio HR, 0.43; 95% CI, 0.30 to 0.60) with 5-year PFS 71% without RT, 86% with RT. A similar advantage was seen for overall survival (HR, 0.47; 95% CI, 0.29 to 0.77). There was no evidence of heterogeneity of treatment effect across subgroups. CONCLUSION: Patients who received consolidation RT apparently had better outcomes, consistently across all prognostic groups which persisted in multivariate analysis. This suggests that RT contributes significantly to the cure rate for advanced HL, although patient selection for combined modality treatment requires better definition in prospective trials.
-------------------------------------

10005202_234 - 0.876543123975 - science
[aerosol, concentration, particle, observation, growth]

Aerosol observations and growth rates downwind of the anvil of a deep tropical thunderstorm.
We present a case study of Aitken and accumulation mode aerosol observed downwind of the anvil of a deep tropical thunderstorm. The measurements were made by condensation nuclei counters flown on the Egrett high-altitude aircraft from Darwin during the ACTIVE campaign, in monsoon conditions producing widespread convection over land and ocean. Maximum measured concentrations of aerosol with diameter greater than 10 nm were 25 000 cm−3 (STP). By calculating back-trajectories from the observations, and projecting onto infrared satellite images, the time since the air exited cloud was estimated. In this way a time scale of about 3 hours was derived for the Aitken aerosol concentration to reach its peak. We examine the hypothesis that the growth in aerosol concentrations can be explained by production of sulphuric acid from SO2 followed by particle nucleation and coagulation. Estimates of the sulphuric acid production rate show that the observations are only consistent with this hypothesis if the particles coagulate to sizes >10 nm much more quickly than is suggested by current theory. Alternatively, other condensible gases (possibly organic) drive the growth of aerosol particles in the TTL
-------------------------------------

10016418_234 - 0.779615318866 - science
[gene, expression, response, plasticity, genomic, ??, genetical]

Mapping determinants of gene expression plasticity by genetical genomics in C. elegans
Recent genetical genomics studies have provided intimate views on gene regulatory networks. Gene expression variations between genetically different individuals have been mapped to the causal regulatory regions, termed expression quantitative trait loci. Whether the environment-induced plastic response of gene expression also shows heritable difference has not yet been studied. Here we show that differential expression induced by temperatures of {16??C} and {24??C} has a strong genetic component in Caenorhabditis elegans recombinant inbred strains derived from a cross between strains {CB4856} {(Hawaii)} and N2 {(Bristol).} No less than 59\% of 308 trans-acting genes showed a significant {eQTL-by-environment} interaction, here termed plasticity quantitative trait loci. In contrast, only 8\% of an estimated 188 cis-acting genes showed such interaction. This indicates that heritable differences in plastic responses of gene expression are largely regulated in trans. This regulation is spread over many different regulators. However, for one group of trans-genes we found prominent evidence for a common master regulator: a transband of 66 coregulated genes appeared at {24??C.} Our results suggest widespread genetic variation of differential expression responses to environmental impacts and demonstrate the potential of genetical genomics for mapping the molecular determinants of phenotypic plasticity. ?? 2006 Li et al.
-------------------------------------

10017154_234 - 0.843568887939 - education
[well-being, staff, school, perception, mental]

School staff perceptions of well-being and experience of an intervention to promote mental well-being
AbstractEducational Psychologists (EPs) spend much of their time working with school staff to solve problems. Staff often report perceptions of high levels of stress, overwork and lack of time to plan and implement changes indicating frequent experience of poor mental well-being. There has been a recent increase in awareness of promoting the well-being of children and young people, however, little attention appears to have been focused as yet upon the school staff who will promote and support this agenda.Research in schools has tended to focus on teachers rather than including all staff. There is a preponderance of research clarifying contributors to teachers’ stress and, to a lesser extent describing interventions in schools. However, little research has focused on school staff understanding and value of well-being and about perceptions of interventions carried out in schools. This study aimed to obtain a greater understanding of the perceptions of school staff about well-being, the value they placed upon it and the experience and perceived impact of taking part in a study aiming to promote staff well-being. An 8 week intervention was carried out in a primary school with weekly sessions of a project which was known as ‘Chill and Chat’. Data was gathered via questionnaires completed before and after the project and 3 focus groups held before, during and after the project. Data was analysed using thematic analysis.It was found that well-being was seen as important, however, colleagues with poor mental well-being were ‘pathologised’. ‘Learning’ to cope and maintain positive well-being was perceived as a responsibility of the staff member. Staff perceived the informality of provision to support their well-being as important and valued the time to develop better relationships with colleagues rather than ‘working relationships’ and also feeling valued and cared for. Staff reported perceptions of greater efficacy in the classroom, increased job satisfaction and feeling calmer in the classroom. The most significant limitation of the study was the continuation of provision to support staff mental well-being which requires commitment and understanding from school senior management teams and local authority members regarding the impact that increased well being can have on teaching and learning and a shift of thought towards focusing on positive well-being promotion rather than managing poor well-being.There are implications for EP practice and research in helping school staff reflect on their well-being and actions that they can take as a team to promote well-being in school. EPs can also be instrumental in disseminating research findings highlighting the impact of staff mental well being on teaching and learning.
-------------------------------------

10005575_234 - 0.757538832961 - medicine
[syndrome, disorder, irritable, bowel]

Irritable bowel syndrome. Definitions and epidemiology.
Irritable bowel syndrome affects up to 20% of the population, is more common in females and is one of the commonest disorders dealt with by gastroenterologists. It is now recognised that the disorder is not confined to the colon and can give rise to a wide variety of different symptoms.
-------------------------------------

10005095_234 - 0.745459486053 - science
[subtype, electrical, islet, factor, transcription, property, lim-homeodomain]

The LIM-Homeodomain Protein Islet Dictates Motor Neuron Electrical Properties by Regulating K(+) Channel Expression.
Neuron electrical properties are critical to function and generally subtype specific, as are patterns of axonal and dendritic projections. Specification of motoneuron morphology and axon pathfinding has been studied extensively, implicating the combinatorial action of Lim-homeodomain transcription factors. However, the specification of electrical properties is not understood. Here, we address the key issues of whether the same transcription factors that specify morphology also determine subtype specific electrical properties. We show that Drosophila motoneuron subtypes express different K(+) currents and that these are regulated by the conserved Lim-homeodomain transcription factor Islet. Specifically, Islet is sufficient to repress a Shaker-mediated A-type K(+) current, most likely due to a direct transcriptional effect. A reduction in Shaker increases the frequency of action potential firing. Our results demonstrate the deterministic role of Islet on the excitability patterns characteristic of motoneuron subtypes.
-------------------------------------

10005273_234 - 0.753901342508 - science
[keloid, excision, margin, border, recurrence, histopathologic, study]

The influence of surgical excision margins on keloid prognosis.
Keloid disease is known to have variable clinical behavior in response to therapy and there is no clinicopathologic classification that predicts such varied behavior. The aim of this study was to study the effect of excision margins and other histopathologic characteristics on keloid prognosis.Seventy-five multiethnic patients presenting with keloid scars at a department of plastic and reconstructive surgery during an 11-year period were included in this study. Clinical data was collected and detailed histologic analyses using light microscopy were carried out on archived patient specimens.A detailed histopathologic examination of all tissue samples identified keloid border or margin characteristics which were classified into "circumscribed" (borders clearly-demarcated) and "infiltrative" (borders not clearly-demarcated and not easily-definable). The specific histologic findings were correlated with keloid recurrence which revealed that incomplete peripheral (P < 0.001) and deep excision margins (P < 0.001), as well as infiltrative borders (P < 0.05) were associated with higher 1-year reported recurrence rates.This study has given evidence that incomplete surgical excision are associated with higher recurrence and this may justify the practice of routine histopathologic reporting of keloid excision margins.
-------------------------------------

10009717_234 - 0.920865815797 - medicine
[patient, strain, albican, apeced, mutation, tac1, azole, resistance, isolate, erg11]

Persistent Candida albicans colonization and molecular mechanisms of azole resistance in autoimmune polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy (APECED) patients.
OBJECTIVES: Patients with autoimmune polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy (APECED, APS-I) suffer from chronic candidosis caused mainly by Candida albicans, and repeated courses of azole antifungals have led to the development of resistance in the APECED patient population in Finland. The aim of our study was to address whether the patients are persistently colonized with the same or genetically closely related strains, whether epidemic strains are present and which molecular mechanisms account for azole resistance. METHODS: Sets of C. albicans (n = 19) isolates from nine APECED patients reported with decreased susceptibility to fluconazole isolated up to 9 years apart were included. The strains were typed by multilocus sequence typing. CDR1/2, MDR1 and ERG11 mRNA expression was analysed by northern blotting and Cdr1, Cdr2 and Mdr1 protein expression by western blotting, and TAC1 and ERG11 genes were sequenced. RESULTS: All seven patients with multiple C. albicans isolates analysed were persistently colonized with the same or a genetically closely related strain for a mean of 5 years. All patients were colonized with different strains and no epidemic strains were found. The major molecular mechanisms behind the azole resistance were mutations in TAC1 contributing to overexpression of CDR1 and CDR2. Six new TAC1 mutations were found, one of which (N740S) is likely to be a gain-of-function mutation. Most isolates were found to have gained multiple TAC1 and ERG11 point mutations. CONCLUSIONS: Despite clinically successful treatment leading to relief of symptoms, colonization by C. albicans strains is persistent within APECED patients. Microevolution and point mutations occur within strains, leading to the development of azole-resistant isolates.
-------------------------------------

10005611_234 - 0.734036961791 - medicine
[chest, heart, pain]

Angina-like chest pain: head, heart or oesophagus?
Chest pain indistinguishable from angina may arise from causes other than ischaemic heart disease. Careful history-taking may help to clarify the situation but further investigation is often needed. Techniques are now available to help assess those patients with normal coronary angiograms and thus lead to more appropriate management.
-------------------------------------

10003972_234 - 0.838357603945 - science
[eazepine, cited, formation, intramolecular, transfer, direct, times, centre-axis, atroposelective, arylation]

Atroposelective formation of dibenzc,eazepines via intramolecular direct arylation with centre-axis chirality transfer
Times Cited: 0
-------------------------------------

10010022_234 - 0.942007788839 - medicine
[symptom, cancer, patient, lung, carer, cluster, significant, management, experience, distress]

The impact of lung cancer on patients and carers.
This article aims to provide a brief review of the literature with regard to the impact of lung cancer on patients and their informal carers. Compared to other types of cancer, the distress associated with lung cancer has been found to be the most intense. Rather than focusing on symptoms in isolation recent emphasis regarding the symptom experience has been on symptoms clusters, as understanding these clusters may improve the management of ongoing and unrelieved symptoms. However, the disparities in methodology are significant barriers to producing comparable results, although recent efforts have been made to address these. Whilst research into symptoms has enormous potential for the management of symptom clusters, it needs to move away from the essentially reductionist stance which currently dominates and broaden its scope to one that acknowledges the complexity of the experience of symptom clusters from the perspective of the patient and their informal carer. Poor management of symptoms complicates patient care and potentially contributes to the heavy burden which often falls on family caregivers, especially as the disease progresses. The majority of studies focus on the experiences of primary care providers, most often the partner/spouse. Such studies have shown that spouses of patients with lung cancer exhibit significant distress and lower levels of quality of life than the general population. Research also indicates that significant others go through a transition process due to changes brought about by the diagnosis of lung cancer and struggle to endure and overcome difficulties and distress. Significant others were seen to suffer during this process of transition and experienced altered relationships. Clinicians working with patients suffering from lung cancer and their carers should intervene to enhance their quality of life from diagnosis, during the disease trajectory and during bereavement. Interventions need to be developed to support both patients and carers.
-------------------------------------

10007514_234 - 0.769689545111 - science
[cell, ctm, cancer, tumor, ctc, emt, patient, lung]

Circulating tumor cells as a window on metastasis biology in lung cancer.
Circulating tumor cell (CTC) number in metastatic cancer patients yields prognostic information consistent with enhanced cell migration and invasion via loss of adhesion, a feature of epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT). Tumor cells also invade via collective migration with maintained cell-cell contacts and consistent with this is the circulating tumor microemboli (CTM; contiguous groups of tumor cells) that are observed in metastatic cancer patients. Using a blood filtration approach, we examined markers of EMT (cytokeratins, E-cadherin, vimentin, neural cadherin) and prevalence of apoptosis in CTCs and CTM to explore likely mechanism(s) of invasion in lung cancer patients and address the hypothesis that cells within CTM have a survival advantage. Intra-patient and inter-patient heterogeneity was observed for EMT markers in CTCs and CTM. Vimentin was only expressed in some CTCs, but in the majority of cells within CTM; E-cadherin expression was lost, cytoplasmic or nuclear, and rarely expressed at the surface of the cells within CTM. A subpopulation of CTCs was apoptotic, but apoptosis was absent within CTM. This pilot study suggests that EMT is not prosecuted homogeneously in tumor cells within the circulation of lung cancer patients and that collective migration and enhanced survival of cells within CTM might contribute to lung cancer metastasis. Multiplex analysis and further detailed exploration of metastatic potential and EMT in CTCs/CTM is now warranted in a larger patient cohort.
-------------------------------------

10003887_234 - 0.743256023241 - medicine
[biomarker, mortality, clinical, addition, predictive, obstructive, history, bode, pulmonary, chronic]

Inflammatory biomarkers improve clinical prediction of mortality in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
RATIONALE: Accurate prediction of mortality helps select patients for interventions aimed at improving outcome. OBJECTIVES: Because chronic obstructive pulmonary disease is characterized by low-grade systemic inflammation, we hypothesized that addition of inflammatory biomarkers to established predictive factors will improve accuracy. METHODS: A total of 1,843 patients enrolled in the Evaluation of COPD Longitudinally to Identify Predictive Surrogate Endpoints study were followed for 3 years. Kaplan-Meier curves, log-rank analysis, and Cox proportional hazards analyses determined the predictive value for mortality of clinical variables, while C statistics assessed the added discriminative power offered by addition of biomarkers. MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: At recruitment we measured anthropometrics, spirometry, 6-minute walk distance, dyspnea, BODE index, history of hospitalization, comorbidities, and computed tomography scan emphysema. White blood cell and neutrophil counts, serum or plasma levels of fibrinogen, chemokine ligand 18, surfactant protein D, C-reactive protein, Clara cell secretory protein-16, IL-6 and -8, and tumor necrosis factor-α were determined at recruitment and subsequent visits. A total of 168 of the 1,843 patients (9.1%) died. Nonsurvivors were older and had more severe airflow limitation, increased dyspnea, higher BODE score, more emphysema, and higher rates of comorbidities and history of hospitalizations. The best predictive model for mortality using clinical variables included age, BODE, and hospitalization history (C statistic of 0.686; P < 0.001). One single biomarker (IL-6) significantly improved the C statistic to 0.708, but this was further improved to 0.726 (P = 0.003) by the addition of all biomarkers. CONCLUSIONS: The addition of a panel of selected biomarkers improves the ability of established clinical variables to predict mortality in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Clinical trial registered with www.clinicaltrials.gov (NCT00292552).
-------------------------------------

10008771_234 - 0.766518643861 - medicine
[amb, treatment, lung, pulmonary, amb-niv]

The efficacy of aerosol treatment with non-ionic surfactant vesicles containing amphotericin B in rodent models of leishmaniasis and pulmonary aspergillosis infection.
Amphotericin B (AMB) is used to treat both fungal and leishmanial infections, which are of major significance to human health. Clinical use of free AMB is limited by its nephrotoxicity, whereas liposomal AMB is costly and requires parenteral administration, thus development of novel formulations with enhanced efficacy, minimal toxicity and that can be applied via non-invasive routes is required. In this study we analysed the potential of non-ionic surfactant vesicles (NIV) given by nebulisation to deliver AMB to the lungs, liver and skin. Treatment with AMB-NIV resulted in significantly higher drug levels in the lungs and skin (p<0.05) compared to similar treatment with AMB solution but significantly lower plasma levels (p<0.05). Treatment with AMB-NIV resulted in a significant reduction in fungal lung burdens in a rat model of invasive pulmonary aspergillosis (p<0.05) compared to treatment with the carrier alone. Treatment with AMB-NIV but not AMB solution significantly suppressed Leishmania donovani liver parasite burdens (p<0.05) but could not inhibit the growth of cutaneous Leishmania major lesions. The results of this study indicate that aerosolised NIV enhanced pulmonary and hepatic delivery whilst minimising systemic exposure and toxicity.
-------------------------------------

10010446_234 - 0.762206465591 - medicine
[fatigue, patient, scale, weakness, mnd, item, factor, model, neurological, energy]

Development of a patient reported outcome measure for fatigue in motor neurone disease: the Neurological Fatigue Index (NFI-MND)
BackgroundThe objective of this research was to develop a disease-specific measure for fatigue in patients with motor neurone disease (MND) by generating data that would fit the Rasch measurement model. Fatigue was defined as reversible motor weakness and whole-body tiredness that was predominantly brought on by muscular exertion and was partially relieved by rest.MethodsQualitative interviews were undertaken to confirm the suitability of a previously identified set of 52 neurological fatigue items as relevant to patients with MND. Patients were recruited from five U.K. MND clinics. Questionnaires were administered during clinic or by post. A sub-sample of patients completed the questionnaire again after 2-4 weeks to assess test-retest validity. Exploratory factor analyses and Rasch analysis were conducted on the item set.ResultsQualitative interviews with ten MND patients confirmed the suitability of 52 previously identified neurological fatigue items as relevant to patients with MND. 298 patients consented to completing the initial questionnaire including this item set, with an additional 78 patients completing the questionnaire a second time after 4-6 weeks. Exploratory Factor Analysis identified five potential subscales that could be conceptualised as representing: 'Energy', 'Reversible muscular weakness' (shortened to 'Weakness'), 'Concentration', 'Effects of heat' and 'Rest'. Of the original five factors, two factors 'Energy' and 'Weakness' met the expectations of the Rasch model. A higher order fatigue summary scale, consisting of items from the 'Energy' and 'Weakness' subscales, was found to fit the Rasch model and have acceptable unidimensionality. The two scales and the higher order summary scale were shown to fulfil model expectations, including assumptions of unidimensionality, local independency and an absence of differential item functioning.ConclusionsThe Neurological Fatigue Index for MND (NFI-MND) is a simple, easy-to-administer fatigue scale. It consists of an 8-item fatigue summary scale in addition to separate scales for measuring fatigue experienced as reversible muscular weakness and fatigue expressed as feelings of low energy and whole body tiredness. The underlying two factor structure supports the patient concept of fatigue derived from qualitative interviews in this population. All three scales were shown to be reliable and capable of interval level measurement.
-------------------------------------

10005569_234 - 0.830098429607 - medicine
[relapse]

Factors preceding relapse of ulcerative colitis.
The effect of intercurrent diarrhoea on relapse of ulcerative colitis was investigated. Diarrhoea resulting from travel abroad, gastroenteritis or antibiotic usage resulted in an approximately 50% relapse rate. With regard to colonoscopy and barium enema, only the latter was followed by relapse and this may reflect differences in the preparation for the procedure.
-------------------------------------

10011797_234 - 0.728250227738 - science
[system, venous, phylogeny, character, cited, times, primate, superficial]

CHARACTER PHYLOGENY OF THE PRIMATE FORELIMB SUPERFICIAL VENOUS SYSTEM
Times Cited: 3
-------------------------------------

10008056_234 - 0.713676350527 - science
[cancer, gene, type, region, scna, alteration]

The landscape of somatic copy-number alteration across human cancers.
A powerful way to discover key genes with causal roles in oncogenesis is to identify genomic regions that undergo frequent alteration in human cancers. Here we present high-resolution analyses of somatic copy-number alterations (SCNAs) from 3,131 cancer specimens, belonging largely to 26 histological types. We identify 158 regions of focal SCNA that are altered at significant frequency across several cancer types, of which 122 cannot be explained by the presence of a known cancer target gene located within these regions. Several gene families are enriched among these regions of focal SCNA, including the BCL2 family of apoptosis regulators and the NF-kappaBeta pathway. We show that cancer cells containing amplifications surrounding the MCL1 and BCL2L1 anti-apoptotic genes depend on the expression of these genes for survival. Finally, we demonstrate that a large majority of SCNAs identified in individual cancer types are present in several cancer types.
-------------------------------------

10003321_234 - 0.707384957832 - medicine
[finding, bowel, inflammatory, symptom, improvement, patient]

Refractory inflammatory bowel disease-could it be an irritable bowel?
Patients with IBD who are apparently in remission-as indicated by normal blood tests, endoscopic findings and ultrasonography results-often continue to experience symptoms. Furthermore, despite these negative findings, there is a temptation to increase their anti-inflammatory medication in the hope that this approach would lead to some improvement. However, this strategy often seems to fail and can sometimes lead to adverse events. Consequently, when evidence of continuing inflammatory activity is lacking it might be appropriate to consider the possibility of co-existent IBS in these patients and to treat them for this condition. Dietary manipulation, antispasmodic agents, antidepressants (especially of the tricyclic variety) and even behavioural treatments might result in a worthwhile improvement of symptoms.
-------------------------------------

10004774_234 - 0.794844665718 - technology_and_computing
[3-d, clock, circuit, topology]

Clock Distribution Architectures for 3-D SOI Integrated Circuits
Three topologies to globally distribute a clock signal in 3-D circuits have been evaluated. A 3-D test circuit, based on the MITLL 3-D IC manufacturing process, has been designed, fabricated, and measured and is shown to operate at 1.4 GHz. Clock skew measurements indicate that a topology that combines the symmetry of an H-tree on the second plane and local meshes on the other two planes will result in low clock skew for 3-D circuits while consuming the lowest power as compared to the other investigated topologies.
-------------------------------------

10004731_234 - 0.916175511759 - science
[fluid, excavation, wall, polymer]

Polymer systems for fluid supported excavations
Excavation support fluids are used in a wide variety of civil engineering operations including piling, diaphragm walling, slurry tunnelling, horizontal directional drilling, oil and water well drilling, drilling site investigation boreholes and the formation of cut-off walls and drainage walls. In each of these applications the role of the fluid is to keep the hole open until a permanent element (concrete, lining etc) is installed. This paper will focus on the use of polymer excavation fluids for piling though polymers can and have been used in all the applications cited except for low permeability cut-off walls, which remain an area of need and opportunity.
-------------------------------------

10005252_234 - 0.878297868134 - science
[keloid, phenotype, scar, clinical]

A clinical characterization of familial keloid disease in unique African tribes reveals distinct keloid phenotypes.
BACKGROUND: This study is a clinical characterization of keloid scars in an African population comprising three rural tribes with familial keloids. Site distribution, morphologic features, and other characteristics of the scars were studied to assess whether each tribe had a specific scar phenotype. METHODS: Keloid scar clinics were set up at Soba Hospital in Khartoum, Sudan, for patient recruitment and management. In addition, familial keloid cases were recruited from rural tribal populations during field trips. A database including clinical and demographic data and digital photographs of all keloid cases was established. Statistical analysis was conducted using SPSS and SAS software. RESULTS: One hundred eleven individuals with keloid scarring (67 male subjects and 44 female subjects) were recruited. Patients were predominantly from three multigenerational pedigrees (total of 38 nuclear families) afflicted with keloid scars residing in different rural regions of Sudan. Two distinct morphologic phenotypes of keloid scarring were observed. The first phenotype has been designated "superficial spreading" (horizontal) keloid and the second has been designated "raised" (vertical) keloid. Clinically significant features and statistically measurable morphologic parameters were compared among these phenotypes (p = 0.001). Furthermore, linear claw-like extensions of keloid (transgression) were noted to be significantly higher in the superficial spreading keloid phenotype (p = 0.03). CONCLUSIONS: There is strong evidence of different phenotypes of keloid scarring. Two distinct phenotypes have been observed, described, and statistically verified. Each tribe demonstrated one particular phenotype, with two being superficial spreading and one being raised. Other significant clinical characteristics have been described. This is of significance in understanding both the clinical basis and the genetic basis of keloid scarring.
-------------------------------------

10008315_234 - 0.782102677448 - art_and_entertainment
[literary, epigraphy, ancient, inscription, epigraphical, introduction, subject]

Introduction: the Reception of Ancient Inscriptions
This introduction opens with an exploration of the modern organisation of epigraphical knowledge, considering its relationship to both antiquarianism and scholarship and its relationship to the subject of the current book, epigraphical references in ancient literary texts. The current fragmentation of the study of ‘literary epigraphy’ calls for a volume which will bring together literary, historical and epigraphical approaches to the subject. The subject of ‘literary epigraphy’ offers much to epigraphers, ancient historians, literary scholars, but also invites us to rethink the nature of epigraphy itself: it contributes to a broader understanding of the nature and reception of epigraphy in the Graeco-Roman world. Bringing the conclusions of our contributors together, this introduction maintains that ancient encounters with inscriptions, preserved through the literary record, offer us a view of the ways in which inscriptions offered a physical and cultural backdrop for activities of all kinds; they offer us valuable insight into individuals’ reaction towards inscriptions and their manipulation of them. Both epigraphy and the idea of epigraphy offered, in antiquity, a pliable tool for claiming, maintaining and demonstrating authority, identity, morality, and power.
-------------------------------------

10009730_234 - 0.966920677706 - medicine
[crswnp, patient, mmp, mmp-9, mmp-8, function, chronic, tissue, disease, metalloproteinase]

Metalloproteinase function in chronic rhinosinusitis with nasal polyposis.
OBJECTIVES: Chronic rhinosinusitis with nasal polyposis (CRSwNP) and asthma share characteristic inflammatory features and histopathologic findings of airway remodeling. Remodeling, which is controlled by matrix metalloproteinases (MMP), is a key event in the pathogenesis of asthma. The MMP functions have rarely been evaluated in CRSwNP. STUDY DESIGN: Prospective and in vivo. METHODS: MMP-7, MMP-8, MMP-9, and tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase (TIMP)-1 concentrations were analyzed by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay and their molecular forms by Western immunoblotting and gelatin zymography in 24 patients operated on for CRSwNP and in nasal lavages from 19 healthy controls. MMP function, protective or destructive, was evaluated by comparing MMP/TIMP-1 levels with the disease activity, estimated by tissue eosinophilia and a need for re-operations. RESULTS: Significantly increased levels of MMP-8/TIMP-1 and MMP-9/TIMP-1 were found in patients without tissue eosinophilia relative to eosinophil-positive CRSwNP patients and controls, as well as in patients who did not require re-operation in comparison with re-operated patients. In eosinophil-positive and re-operated patients, these parameters were within the same range than in controls. CONCLUSIONS: Proteolytic spectrum is different in eosinophilic and noneosinophilic CRSwNP, suggesting a new mechanism for eosinophil accumulation in the disease pathogenesis. Enhanced MMP-8 and MMP-9 expression was associated with a better prognosis/clinical outcome, and thus these results may represent a synergic, protective role of MMP-8 and MMP-9 in host response in CRSwNP. Because synthetic MMP inhibitors, capable of equilibrating the unfavorable MMP/TIMP-ratio, may be of potential therapeutic value in chronic respiratory tract diseases, the MMP functions in inflammatory conditions need to be carefully established.
-------------------------------------

10011575_234 - 0.76464497312 - science
[liquid, ester, oil, power, transformer]

Ester insulating liquids for power transformers
The properties of ester insulating liquids, including both synthetic and natural esters, offer the potential for transformers with lower fire risk and greater environmental compatibility when compared with those filled with mineral oil. This potential has led to intensive studies of the electrical and thermal performance of ester liquids in recent years.A collective research effort was made to study ester liquids by a number of companies within the UK electric power industry particularly in respect of their application to large power transformers. With a liquid provider and a transformer manufacturer, extensive research has been carried out at a university into the dielectric aspects of the insulating liquids to prove the feasibility of using an ester liquid in place of mineral oil in large high voltage power transformers.This paper sets out the results of this research focusing mainly on the electrical performance of ester liquids. Experimental tests in both quasi-uniform and non-uniform electric fields including discharge initiation, propagation and breakdown were carried out under both AC and lightning impulse voltages. In addition to open oil gaps, the influence of pressboard in parallel to the oil gap was also investigated. The comparison between the performance of ester liquids and mineral oil, allows conclusions to be made regarding the application of ester liquids in power transformers.
-------------------------------------

10018328_234 - 0.883656456273 - science
[eosinophilia, virus, protein, mouse, rvv, region, responsible, protective, rsv, lung]

Eliminating a region of respiratory syncytial virus attachment protein allows induction of protective immunity without vaccine-enhanced lung eosinophilia.
In a murine model of respiratory syncytial virus disease, prior sensitization to the attachment glycoprotein (G) leads to pulmonary eosinophilia and enhanced illness. Three different approaches were taken to dissect the region of G responsible for enhanced disease and protection against challenge. First, mutant viruses, containing frameshifts that altered the COOH terminus of the G protein, were used to challenge mice sensitized by scarification with recombinant vaccinia virus (rVV) expressing wild-type G. Second, cDNA expressing these mutated G proteins were expressed by rVV and used to vaccinate mice before challenge with wild-type respiratory syncytial virus (RSV). These studies identified residues 193-205 to be responsible for G-induced weight loss and lung eosinophilia and showed that this region was not was not necessary for induction of protective immunity. Third, mice were sensitized using an rVV that expressed only amino acids 124-203 of the G protein. Upon RSV challenge, mice sensitized with this rVV developed enhanced weight loss and eosinophilia. This is the first time that a region within RSV (amino acids 193-203) has been shown to be responsible for induction of lung eosinophilia and disease enhancement. Moreover, we now show that it is possible to induce protective immunity with an altered G protein without inducing a pathological response.
-------------------------------------

10017884_234 - 0.914481109737 - science
[muskelin, cell, morphology, ranbp9, localization, complex, activity, protein, terminus]

Novel role of the muskelin-RanBP9 complex as a nucleocytoplasmic mediator of cell morphology regulation.
The evolutionarily conserved kelch-repeat protein muskelin was identified as an intracellular mediator of cell spreading. We discovered that its morphological activity is controlled by association with RanBP9/RanBPM, a protein involved in transmembrane signaling and a conserved intracellular protein complex. By subcellular fractionation, endogenous muskelin is present in both the nucleus and the cytosol. Muskelin subcellular localization is coregulated by its C terminus, which provides a cytoplasmic restraint and also controls the interaction of muskelin with RanBP9, and its atypical lissencephaly-1 homology motif, which has a nuclear localization activity which is regulated by the status of the C terminus. Transient or stable short interfering RNA-based knockdown of muskelin resulted in protrusive cell morphologies with enlarged cell perimeters. Morphology was specifically restored by complementary DNAs encoding forms of muskelin with full activity of the C terminus for cytoplasmic localization and RanBP9 binding. Knockdown of RanBP9 resulted in equivalent morphological alterations. These novel findings identify a role for muskelin-RanBP9 complex in pathways that integrate cell morphology regulation and nucleocytoplasmic communication.
-------------------------------------

10011582_234 - 0.818350180627 - science
[graphene, layer, band, shift, nanocomposite, reinforcement, transfer, stress, polymer, number]

Optimizing the Reinforcement of Polymer-Based Nanocomposites by Graphene
The stress transfer between the internal layers of multilayer graphene within polymer-based nanocomposites has been investigated from the stress-Induced shifts of the 2D Raman band. This has been undertaken through the study of the deformation of an ideal composite system where the graphene flakes were placed upon the surface of a polymer beam and then coated with an epoxy polymer. It is found that the rate of band shift per unit strain for a monolayer graphene flake is virtually independent of whether it has one or two polymer interfaces (i.e., with or without an epoxy top coating). In contrast, the rate of band shift is lower for an uncoated bilayer specimen than a coated one, indicating relatively poor stress transfer between the graphene layers. Mapping of the strain In the coated bilayer regions has shown that there is strain continuity between adjacent monolayer and bilayer regions, Indicating that they give rise to similar levels of reinforcement. Strain-Induced Raman band shifts have also been evaluated for separate flakes of graphene with different numbers of layers, and it is found that the band shift rate tends to decrease with an increase in the number of layers, indicating poor stress transfer between the inner graphene layers. This behavior has been modeled in terms of the efficiency of stress transfer between the inner graphene layers. Taking into account the packing geometry of polymer-based graphene nanocomposites and the need to accommodate the polymer coils, these findings enable the optimum number of graphene layers for the best reinforcement to be determined. It is demonstrated that, in general, multilayer graphene will give rise to higher levels of reinforcement than monolayer material, with the optimum number of layers depending upon the separation of the graphene flakes in the nanocomposite.
-------------------------------------

10017920_234 - 0.794516814738 - science
[uva, radiation, ssr, collagen, protein, fibrillin, fibronectin, nm, solar, tropoelastin]

The UVA component of solar simulated radiation differentially degrades dermal proteins associated with photoageing
Chronic exposure to ultraviolet (UV) radiation causes remodelling of the dermal extracellular matrix (ECM) leading to photoageing. This remodelling may be driven by cell-derived proteases and/or photochemical mechanisms. We have previously shown that the amino acid composition of dermal ECM proteins correlates with their relative susceptibility to degradation by broadband UVB radiation. UV-chromophore-rich proteins such as fibrillin and fibronectin were preferentially degraded but not chromophore-poor collagen I and tropoelastin. In this study, we determine whether physiological doses of the UVA (315-400nm) component of solar radiation are capable of differentially degrading these ECM proteins. Suspensions of bovine collagen I and fibronectin, recombinant tropoelastin and human dermal fibroblast-derived fibrillin microfibrils were exposed to full spectrum Solar Simulated Radiation (SSR; 290-400nm: 0.8, 7.7 and 15.4J/cm2 and UVA (315-400nm): 1, 10 and 20J/cm2. The effects of SSR and UVA exposure on molecular structure were determined by reducing SDS-PAGE (collagen I, tropoelastin and fibronectin) and atomic force microscopy (fibrillin). Neither SSR nor UVA radiation affected the electrophoretic mobility of chromophore-poor collagen I and tropoelastin. However, both UV spectra induced dose-dependent aggregation of fibronectin (SSR: r2 0.99, UVA: r2 0.98). Similarly, both SSR and UVA radiation also significantly reduced the bead-to-bead distance of fibrillin microfibrils (SSR: mean±SD, 56.6±9.7nm 0J/cm2, 53.2±10.3nm 15.4J/cm2, p<0.001; UVA: 58.2±9.6nm 0J/cm2, 56.0±15.9nm 20J/cm2, p<0.001). These data suggest that, in contrast to structural proteins (collagen I and elastin), adhesive glycoproteins (fibronectin and fibrillin) may be susceptible to direct damage by physiological doses of the UVA component of solar radiation in vivo.
-------------------------------------

10009588_234 - 0.869780255831 - science
[mutational, melanoma, primary, acral, genome, snv, metastasis, metastatic, mutation, rate]

Whole genome sequencing of matched primary and metastatic acral melanomas.
Next generation sequencing has enabled systematic discovery of mutational spectra in cancer samples. Here, we used whole genome sequencing to characterize somatic mutations and structural variation in a primary acral melanoma and its lymph node metastasis. Our data show that the somatic mutational rates in this acral melanoma sample pair were more comparable to the rates reported in cancer genomes not associated with mutagenic exposure than in the genome of a melanoma cell line or the transcriptome of melanoma short-term cultures. Despite the perception that acral skin is sun-protected, the dominant mutational signature in these samples is compatible with damage due to ultraviolet light exposure. A nonsense mutation in ERCC5 discovered in both the primary and metastatic tumors could also have contributed to the mutational signature through accumulation of unrepaired dipyrimidine lesions. However, evidence of transcription-coupled repair was suggested by the lower mutational rate in the transcribed regions and expressed genes. The primary and the metastasis are highly similar at the level of global gene copy number alterations, loss of heterozygosity and single nucleotide variation (SNV). Furthermore, the majority of the SNVs in the primary tumor were propagated in the metastasis and one nonsynonymous coding SNV and one splice site mutation appeared to arise de novo in the metastatic lesion.
-------------------------------------

10003501_234 - 0.845830550826 - science
[tail, integrin, mutation, development, npxy, motif, renal, system, talin, interaction]

β1 Integrin NPxY Motifs Regulate Kidney Collecting Duct Development and Maintenanceby Induced-Fit Interactions with Cytosolic Proteins.
Loss of β1 integrin expression inhibits renal collecting system development. Two highly conserved NPxY motifs in the distal β1 tail regulate integrin function by associating with PTB proteins such as talin and kindlin. Here we define the role of these two tyrosines in collecting system development and delineate the structural determinants of the distal β1 tail using NMR. Mice carrying alanine mutations have moderate renal collecting system developmental abnormalities relative to β1-null mice. Phenylalanine mutations did not affect renal collecting system development but increased susceptibility to renal injury. NMR spectra in bicelles showed the distal β1 tail is disordered and does not interact with the model membrane surface. Alanine or phenylanine mutations did not alter β1 structure or interactions between ? and β1 subunit transmembrane/cytoplasmic domains; however they did decrease talin and kindlin binding. Thus these studies highlight that the functional roles of the NPxY motifs is organ dependent. Moreover, the β1 cytoplasmic tail, in the context of the adjacent transmembrane domain in bicelles, is significantly different from the more ordered, membrane associated β3 integrin tail. Finally, tyrosine mutations of β1 NPxY motifs induce phenotypes by disrupting their interactions with critical integrin binding proteins like talins and kindlins.
-------------------------------------

10010595_234 - 0.798220455526 - science
[plasmid, linear, secondary, genome, chromosome, genetic, bacterium, metabolite]

The Sequence of a 1.8-Mb Bacterial Linear Plasmid Reveals a Rich Evolutionary Reservoir of Secondary Metabolic Pathways
Plasmids are mobile genetic elements that play a key role in the evolution of bacteria by mediating genome plasticity and lateral transfer of useful genetic information. Although originally considered to be exclusively circular, linear plasmids have also been identified in certain bacterial phyla, notably the actinomycetes. In some cases, linear plasmids engage with chromosomes in an intricate evolutionary interplay, facilitating the emergence of new genome configurations by transfer and recombination or plasmid integration. Genome sequencing of Streptomyces clavuligerus {ATCC} 27064, a Gram-positive soil bacterium known for its production ofadiverse arrayofbiotechnologically important secondary metabolites, revealedagiantlinear plasmidof1.8 Mb in length. This megaplasmid {(pSCL4)isone} ofthe largest plasmids ever identified and the largest linear plasmidto be sequenced. It contains more than 20\% of the putative protein-coding genes of the species, but none of these is predicted to be essential for primary metabolism. Instead, the plasmidis densely packed with anexceptionally large numberofgene clusters for the potential production of secondary metabolites, including a large number of putative antibiotics, such as staurosporine, moenomycin, ??-lactams, and enediynes. Interestingly, cross-regulation occurs between chromosomal and plasmid-encoded genes. Several factors suggest that the megaplasmid came into existence through recombination of a smaller plasmid with the arms of the main chromosome. Phylogenetic analysis indicates that heavy traffic of genetic information between Streptomyces plasmids and chromosomes may facilitate the rapid evolution of secondary metabolite repertoires in these bacteria. ?? The Author(s) 2010.
-------------------------------------

10010339_234 - 0.787373392505 - science
[phylogeny, streptomyce, species, tree, genome-based, phylogenetic, relative, robust, method]

Genome-based phylogenetic analysis of Streptomyces and its relatives
Motivation: Streptomyces is one of the best-studied genera of the order Actinomycetales due to its great importance in medical science, ecology and the biotechnology industry. A comprehensive, detailed and robust phylogeny of Streptomyces and its relatives is needed for understanding how this group emerged and maintained such a vast diversity throughout evolution and how soil-living mycelial forms (e.g., Streptomyces s. str.) are related to parasitic, unicellular pathogens (e.g., Mycobacterium tuberculosis) or marine species (e.g., Salinispora tropica). The most important application area of such a phylogenetic analysis will be in the comparative re-annotation of genome sequences and the reconstruction of Streptomyces metabolic networks for biotechnology. Methods: Classical 16S-rRNA-based phylogenetic reconstruction does not guarantee to produce well-resolved robust trees that reflect the overall relationship between bacterial species with widespread horizontal gene transfer. In our study we therefore combine three whole genome-based phylogenies with eight different, highly informative single-gene phylogenies to determine a new robust consensus tree of 45 Actinomycetales species with completely sequenced genomes. Results: None of the individual methods achieved a resolved phylogeny of Streptomyces and its relatives. Single-gene approaches failed to yield a detailed phylogeny; even though the single trees are in good agreement among each other, they show very low resolution of inner branches. The three whole genome-based methods improve resolution considerably. Only by combining the phylogenies from single gene-based and genome-based approaches we finally obtained a consensus tree with well-resolved branches for the entire set of Actinomycetales species. This phylogenetic information is stable and informative enough for application to the system-wide comparative modeling of bacterial physiology. ?? 2009 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
-------------------------------------

10008191_234 - 0.891037354439 - science
[chemical, epigenetic, allergic, mechanism, response, immune, drug, allergen]

Regulation of Allergic Responses to Chemicals and Drugs: Possible Roles of Epigenetic Mechanisms.
There is increasing evidence that epigenetic regulation of gene expression plays a pivotal role in the orchestration of immune and allergic responses. Such regulatory mechanisms have potentially important implications for the acquisition of sensitization to chemical and drug allergens, and in determining the vigor, characteristics and longevity of allergic responses. Importantly, the discovery of long-lasting epigenetic alterations in specific immunoregulatory genes provides a mechanistic basis for immune cell memory, and thereby the potential of chemical allergens to influence the subsequent orientation of the adaptive immune system. In this article we consider the implications of epigenetic mechanisms for the development of sensitization to chemical and drug allergens and the form that allergic reactions will take.
-------------------------------------

10005280_234 - 0.8821146168 - science
[keloid, healing, molecular, wound, process, disease, scar, cell]

Molecular dissection of abnormal wound healing processes resulting in keloid disease.
Keloids are locally aggressive scars that typically invade into healthy surrounding skin and cause both physical and psychosocial distress to the patient. These pathological scars occur following minimal skin trauma after a variety of causes including burns and trauma. Although the pathogenesis of keloid disease is not well understood, it is considered to be the end product of an abnormal healing process. The aim of this review was to investigate the molecular and cellular pathobiology of keloid disease in relation to the normal wound healing process. The molecular aberrances in keloids that correlate with the molecular mechanisms in normal wound healing can be categorized into three groups: (1) extracellular matrix proteins and their degradation, (2) cytokines and growth factors, and (3) apoptotic pathways. With respect to cellular involvements, fibroblasts are the most well-studied cell population. However, it is unclear whether the fibroblast is the causative cell; they are modulated by other cell populations in wound repair, such as keratinocytes and macrophages. This review presents a detailed account of individual phases of the healing process and how they may potentially be implicated in aberrant raised scar formation, which may help in clarifying the mechanisms involved in keloid disease pathogenesis.
-------------------------------------

10005797_234 - 0.756052492438 - science
[sensor, ammonia, black, composite, solution, pani]

Highly Sensitive Detection of Ammonia Using Solution Processable Polyaniline/Carbon Black Composite Sensors
A highly sensitive ammonia sensor has been fabricated by depositing solution processable
polyaniline/carbon black conductive composites on to flexible plastic substrates with gold
interdigitated electrodes. Polyaniline (PANI) is known to be an excellent sensing material for
ammonia, since NH3 deprotonates the amine group in emeraldine salt (doped form of PANI),
converting it to emeraldine base (undoped form) which may cause a significant decrease in
conductivity. The very high affinity of PANI to ammonia has its drawbacks, mainly with regard to
sensor recovery where long timescales are required to return the sensor to its baseline. Operation at
elevated temperatures can improve desorption of NH3 molecules from the sensor film, hence
improving the recovery time.
Unfortunately, lack of solution processability, the inherent problem with conventional PANI
especially in its doped stat, has limited implementation of this material in conventional sensor
fabrication methods. Here, we have exploited sulphosuccinic acid (SSA), a multifunctional dopant
with sulphonic and carboxylic acid groups, which not only renders the doped PANI soluble in aprotic
solvents such as n-methyl pyrrolidone (NMP), but also makes it possible to prepare conductive
composites of PANI/carbon black (CB) simply by mixing surface modified carbon black with PANI
solution. Sensors were fabricated by depositing a thin layer of PANI/CB dispersion in NMP via dip
coating on flexible polyimide and polyethylene naphthalate substrates incorporating a heater.
Sensor response to very low concentrations of ammonia vapour at 80 ˚C was measured. Due to
high affinity of polyaniline to ammonia and presence of conductive pathways of carbon black
through out the composite layer, the sensor exhibits sensitive and fast response down to ppb
concentrations. The high sensitivity, rapid response and good reversibility of the sensor make it
promising for real-time ammonia sensing applications.
-------------------------------------

10008665_234 - 0.941507409032 - medicine
[patient, cancer, chemotherapy, cytokeratin, crc, tck18, pd, biomarker, ck18]

Multi-level evidence that circulating CK18 is a biomarker of tumour burden in colorectal cancer.
Background:Circulating total cytokeratin 18 (tCK18) and/or caspase cleaved cytokeratin 18 (cCK18) (measured by M65 and M30 enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (ELISAs), respectively) are used as pharmacodynamic (PD) biomarkers of epithelial cell death in clinical trials. Having validated these ELISAs, we assessed their utility in colorectal cancer (CRC).Methods:We applied the assays in several settings: 53 controls; 97 patients undergoing surgery and 74 patients with metastatic CRC undergoing chemotherapy (55 first line; 56 patients with repeated sampling through chemotherapy). Prognostic significance was evaluated using Kaplan-Meier life tables and Cox models; PD utility was assessed by analysis of repeated measures.Results:Median cCK18 and tCK18 levels were elevated in patients with cancer (both P=0.0001), and among cancer patients, there were increasing trends from early to advanced stages (both P(trends)=0.0001). Increasing tCK18 predicted for reduced survival after surgery with curative intent (adjusted hazard ratio (HR) for doubling in concentration 1.77, 95% CI: 1.04, 3.01) and after first-line chemotherapy in metastatic disease (adjusted HR per doubling in concentration=1.78, 95% CI: 1.37, 2.30). In patients with progressive disease during chemotherapy, repeated sampling revealed profiles with high baselines and progressive upwardly increases after cycle 1.Conclusion:This study provides evidence for cytokeratin 18 (CK18) as a prognostic and PD biomarker in patients with CRC and supports continued deployment of circulating CK18 in biomarker-enhanced trials.British Journal of Cancer advance online publication, 20 September 2012; doi:10.1038/bjc.2012.416www.bjcancer.com.
-------------------------------------

10010589_234 - 0.701317241952 - technology_and_computing
[datum, mass, format, peakml, software, file, analysis]

PeakML/mzMatch: A File Format, Java Library, R Library, and Tool-Chain for Mass Spectrometry Data Analysis
The recent proliferation of high-resolution mass spectrometers has generated a wealth of new data analysis methods. However, flexible integration of these methods into configurations best suited to the research question is hampered by heterogeneous file formats and monolithic software development. The mzXML, mzData, and mzML file formats have enabled uniform access to unprocessed raw data. In this paper we present our efforts to produce an equally simple and powerful format, PeakML, to uniformly exchange processed intermediary and result data. To demonstrate the versatility of PeakML, we have developed an open source Java toolkit for processing, filtering, and annotating mass spectra in a customizable pipeline (mzMatch), as well as a user-friendly data visualization environment (PeakML Viewer). The PeakML format in particular enables the flexible exchange of processed data between software created by different groups or companies, as we illustrate by providing a PeakML-based integration of the widely used XCMS package with mzMatch data processing tools. As an added advantage, downstream analysis can benefit from direct access to the full mass trace information underlying summarized mass spectrometry results, providing the user with the means to rapidly verify results. The PeakML/mzMatch software is freely available at http://mzmatch.sourceforge.net, with documentation, tutorials, and a community forum. ?? 2011 American Chemical Society.
-------------------------------------

10013585_234 - 0.78975738167 - medicine
[symptom, progression, psychosis, first-episode, clinical, trial, subthreshold, intervention, jour, sample]

Randomized controlled trial of interventions designed to reduce the risk of progression to first-episode psychosis in a clinical sample with subthreshold symptoms.
TY - JOUR
-------------------------------------

10014386_234 - 0.870060162377 - science
[expression, biosynthesis, cholesterol, embryonic, restricted, region]

Embryonic expression of cholesterogenic genes is restricted to distinct domains and colocalizes with apoptotic regions in mice
Cholesterol biosynthesis has been assumed to be an ubiquitous process in vertebrate organisms. Here we present data demonstrating that expression of key enzymes of cholesterol biosynthesis is restricted to specific tissues during embryonic development. Distinct expression starts in the dorsal neural tube at embryonic day 8 and is later detected in dorsal root and cephalic ganglia, in the pharyngeal pouches and limb buds. In the limb, expression becomes progressively restricted to interdigital regions during differentiation. Caspase3 whole mount immunostaining revealed that cholesterol biosynthesis colocalizes with apoptotic regions that are targets of the morphogenic signal Sonic hedgehog. This expression pattern correlates closely with the shared phenotypic features of cholesterol biosynthesis and hedgehog mutants. ?? 2003 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
-------------------------------------

10008167_234 - 0.925981536532 - medicine
[schizophrenia, patient, abnormality, visual, task, oscillatory]

Core dysfunction in schizophrenia: electrophysiology trait biomarkers.
OBJECTIVE: Core symptoms of schizophrenia, particularly in the cognitive domain are hypothesized to be due to an abnormality in neural connectivity. Biomarkers of connectivity may therefore be a promising tool in exploring the aetiology of schizophrenia. We used electrophysiological methods to demonstrate abnormal visual information processing during in patients performing a simple cognitive task. METHOD: Electrophysiological recordings were acquired from 20 chronically ill, medicated patients diagnosed with either schizophrenia or schizo-affective disorder and 20 healthy volunteers while they conducted a working memory (WM) task. RESULTS: The patient group had significantly lower accuracy on the WM task and a trend for slower responses. An early visual evoked response potential was reduced in patients. Analysis of the electroencephalographic oscillations showed a decreased phase-locking factor (in the theta, beta and gamma bands) and signal power (theta frequency band). The beta and gamma oscillatory abnormalities were confined to two sets of correlated fronto and occipital electrodes. CONCLUSION: The findings of event-related potential and oscillatory abnormalities in patients with schizophrenia confirm the sensitivity of early visual information processing measurements for identification of schizophrenia phenotype. The fronto-occipital distribution of the oscillatory abnormalities replicates our findings from a schizotypal sample and implicates a possible top-down dysfunction as a vulnerability trait.
-------------------------------------

10007505_234 - 0.948274370271 - medicine
[chemotherapy, patient, treatment, month, platinum-based, time, rr, sclc, survival, median]

Outcomes of small-cell lung cancer patients treated with second-line chemotherapy: a multi-institutional retrospective analysis.
BACKGROUND: Patients with small-cell lung cancer (SCLC) that progress after first-line chemotherapy have a poor prognosis and the evidence of a benefit from second-line (SL) chemotherapy is limited. Patients relapsing or progressing more than 90 days after completion of first-line treatment are considered platinum sensitive and may be rechallenged with platinum-based chemotherapy. Topotecan is approved as SL treatment independent of time to progression. This retrospective analysis evaluates the clinical outcomes of SCLC patients who received SL chemotherapy after platinum-etoposide chemotherapy. PATIENTS AND METHODS: We retrospectively reviewed 161 patients who received SL chemotherapy for SCLC. Patients were divided into four subgroups by type of SL treatment: (1) platinum-based rechallenge; (2) anthracycline-based regimens; (3) topotecan; (4) other single agents. The endpoints were overall survival (OS), progression-free survival (PFS) and response rate (RR). Survival curves were plotted using the Kaplan-Meier method. The Cox proportional hazard model was used for multivariate analysis to investigate factors influencing survival. RESULTS: The median age was 63. There were 125 males and 36 females. Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group performance status (ECOG-PS) was 0, 1 and 2 in 12.5%, 62.5% and 25% of patients, respectively. Platinum sensitive/platinum resistant/platinum refractory/unknown=121/29/3/8 patients. Median time to SL chemotherapy was 6.9 months. The median PFS from starting second-line treatment was 4.3 months and median OS was 5.8 months. The overall RR was 22.9%. There was a trend toward higher RR (34.5% vs 17.5%, p for trend: 0.06) and OS (9.2 months vs 5.8 months, p=0.08) for patients with sensitive disease who were rechallenged with platinum-based chemotherapy. A multivariate analysis that adjusted for the time to SL treatment showed that a platinum-containing regimen achieves better RR, PFS and OS independently of the time to SL chemotherapy and that response to first-line treatment and PS at SL are the only independent prognostic factors. CONCLUSIONS: The outcome for second-line therapy for SCLC was poor and benefit appeared to be limited to those patients with good PS and rechallenged with platinum-based chemotherapy. Platinum-based rechallenge should be considered as a standard comparator in future randomized controlled trials of SL chemotherapy.
-------------------------------------

10009177_234 - 0.736523273951 - science
[chemical, respiratory, allergen, skin, peptide, reactivity, dpra]

The direct Peptide reactivity assay: selectivity of chemical respiratory allergens.
It is well known that some chemicals are capable of causing allergic diseases of the skin and respiratory tract. Commonly, though not exclusively, chemical allergens are associated with the selective development of skin or respiratory sensitization. The reason for this divergence is unclear, although it is hypothesized that the nature of interactions between the chemical hapten and proteins is influential. The direct peptide reactivity assay (DPRA) has been developed as a screen for the identification of skin-sensitizing chemicals, and here we describe the use of this method to explore whether differences exist between skin and respiratory allergens with respect to their peptide-binding properties. Known skin and respiratory sensitizers were reacted with synthetic peptides containing either lysine (Lys) or cysteine (Cys) for 24h. The samples were analyzed by HPLC/UV, and the loss of peptide from the reaction mixture was expressed as the percent depletion compared with the control. The potential for preferential reactivity was evaluated by comparing the ratio of Lys to Cys depletion (Lys:Cys ratio). The results demonstrate that the majority of respiratory allergens are reactive in the DPRA, and that in contrast to most skin-sensitizing chemicals, preferentially react with the Lys peptide. These data suggest that skin and respiratory chemical allergens can result in different protein conjugates, which may in turn influence the quality of induced immune responses. Overall, these investigations reveal that the DPRA has considerable potential to be incorporated into tiered testing approaches for the identification and characterization of chemical respiratory allergens.
-------------------------------------

10017791_234 - 0.808492803563 - science
[chemokine, times, receptor, antagonist, binding, cxcr4, cited, fluorescent, metal]

Fluorescent CXCR4 chemokine receptor antagonists: metal activated binding
Times Cited: 18
-------------------------------------

10002302_234 - 0.706389149977 - science
[soil, bhp, index, bay, organic, sediment, potential, sub-arctic, transect, arctic]

Soil organic matter transport along an sub-Arctic river–sea transect
Bacteriohopanepolyols (BHPs) and glycerol dialkyl glycerol tetraethers (GDGTs) have potential as soil-tracing biomarkers for the extensive shelves of the Arctic Ocean. In this work these biomarkers were analysed in surface sediments along a well characterised sub-Arctic transect in the northernmost Baltic Sea from the Kalix River to the central Bothnian Bay to assess their environmental behaviour and potential for tracing the contribution of soil in this type of system. There was a high BHP diversity and enhanced total BHP concentration in the estuarine sediments, whereas a much less diverse pattern could be observed in the open bay with lower total BHP concentration. In addition, both soil marker BHPs (adenosylhopanes) and branched GDGTs were substantially more abundant in the estuarine than the open bay sediments. The R soil ′ index, based on the Rsoil index minus the contribution from the methylated soil marker BHPs, is suggested as a new approach for tracing soil derived organic matter (OM) in the (sub)-Arctic region. The index decreased along the transect in an off-river direction, correlating strongly with both the branched and isoprenoid tetraether (BIT) index and the stable carbon isotopic composition of the sedimentary organic carbon. These field results indicate that both the R soil ′ and the BIT indices have potential for tracing soil derived OM in sub-Arctic to Arctic waters.
-------------------------------------

10017178_234 - 0.796340449364 - science
[hair, follicle, growth, fungal, mentagrophyte, invasion]

An in vitro model of dermatophyte invasion of the human hair follicle.
A novel in vitro model for the study of hair invasion by Trichophyton mentagrophytes was developed. Hair was obtained by microdissection and plucking. Following inoculation of the hair follicle with arthroconidia growth of the fungus was seen on the hair and within the follicle. Growth was observed to begin at the shaft end and to extend along the hair shaft towards the bulb area. In follicles maintained in organ culture the inner root sheath in particular was invaded by T. mentagrophytes and provided a good substrate for fungal growth. Initially, the cuticle formed a barrier to fungal penetration of the hair. After incubation for 4 days, germlings of T. mentagrophytes were seen to penetrate under the cuticle and in between the layers of cuticular cells to invade the cortex. There was no evidence of intracellular growth; fungal elements were seen intercellularly. There were similarities between the findings in this study of the process of hair invasion by dermatophyte fungi and that in the natural disease.
-------------------------------------

10005017_234 - 0.890181755987 - science
[particle, separation, filter, barrier, engine]

A Comparative Study of Helicopter Engine Air Particle Separation Technologies
An investigation into the efficacy of helicopter engine sand filters is conducted. Engine Air Particle Separation devices are broadly split into three categories: Vortex Tube Separators, Integrated Particle Separators, and Inlet Barrier Filters. The first two are inertial separators that scavenge particles by centrifugal force; the latter traps particles on its surface, but all three are designed with the aim or removing all particles from the engine bound air. Each technology is different, which gives rise to varying levels of efficacy. The current work uses low order analytical and numerical models to explore these differences and introduces a metric for quantifying the quality of air-particle separation performance. The vortex tube separators exhibit a high efficiency and low pressure drop, but require auxiliary power to operate and experience considerable drag at high forward speeds. Inertial particle separators do not achieve the high separation efficiencies of the vortex tubes or barrier filters, but have a large mass flow to frontal area ratio, hence low drag. Inlet barrier filters are highly efficient at removing particles and improve in this over time due to the accumulation of particles, but at the expense of a temporally increasing pressure drop. The new metric is a quality factor that can be used to directly compare separation technologies for helicopter. Its application is demonstrated by the inlet barrier filter which, when clean, is the best performing device, but over time deteriorates in quality due to the accumulation of particles.
-------------------------------------

10011828_234 - 0.891133606877 - science
[ffpe, tissue, gene, classification, archival, microarray, molecular, case, dlbcl, potential]

Microarray gene expression analysis of fixed archival tissue permits molecular classification and identification of potential therapeutic targets in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma.
Refractory/relapsed diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) has a poor prognosis. Novel drugs targeting the constitutively activated NF-κB pathway characteristic of ABC-DLBCL are promising, but evaluation depends on accurate activated B cell-like (ABC)/germinal center B cell-like (GCB) molecular classification. This is traditionally performed on gene microarray expression profiles of fresh biopsies, which are not routinely collected, or by immunohistochemistry on formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissue, which lacks reproducibility and classification accuracy. We explored the possibility of using routine archival FFPE tissue for gene microarray applications. We examined Affymetrix HG U133 Plus 2.0 gene expression profiles from paired archival FFPE and fresh-frozen tissues of 40 ABC/GCB-classified DLBCL cases to compare classification accuracy and test the potential for this approach to aid the discovery of therapeutic targets and disease classifiers in DLBCL. Unsupervised hierarchical clustering of unselected present probe sets distinguished ABC/GCB in FFPE with remarkable accuracy, and a Bayesian classifier correctly assigned 32 of 36 cases with >90% probability. Enrichment for NF-κB genes was appropriately seen in ABC-DLBCL FFPE tissues. The top discriminatory genes expressed in FFPE separated cases with high statistical significance and contained novel biology with potential therapeutic insights, warranting further investigation. These results support a growing understanding that archival FFPE tissues can be used in microarray experiments aimed at molecular classification, prognostic biomarker discovery, and molecular exploration of rare diseases.
-------------------------------------

10007487_234 - 0.939229278718 - medicine
[intervention, patient, nonpharmacological, caregiver, cancer, study, symptom]

Considerations in Developing and Delivering a Nonpharmacological Intervention for Symptom Management in Lung Cancer: The Views of Patients and Informal Caregivers.
CONTEXT: Few studies consider patient's and caregiver's preferences when developing nonpharmacological interventions. This is important to develop acceptable and accessible nonpharmacological interventions for patients with cancer. OBJECTIVES: The objective of this study was to identify the views of patients with lung cancer and their informal caregivers on the desirable components of a novel nonpharmacological intervention for the management of the symptom cluster of cough, breathlessness, and fatigue, and their needs and preferences regarding uptake and delivery of the intervention. METHODS: This study was qualitative in orientation, using semistructured interviews and framework analysis to elicit the views of 37 patients with lung cancer and 23 caregivers regarding the issues that were perceived to be important regarding the development and delivery of a nonpharmacological intervention. RESULTS: A number of key issues were identified that carried important implications for patient's participation and adherence to the intervention, including the perceived relevance of potential techniques; appreciable benefits in the short term; convenience; variation in patient's preferences; timing of the intervention; venue; caregiver's involvement; the provider of the intervention, and contact with other patients. CONCLUSION: The data from this study have provided insight into the key issues that are likely to influence the development, uptake, and delivery of a nonpharmacological intervention to help manage the respiratory symptom cluster of cough, breathlessness, and fatigue. It is crucial that these findings are considered when developing and modeling a nonpharmacological symptom management intervention.
-------------------------------------

10005169_234 - 0.832613487548 - technology_and_computing
[design, circuit, device, chip, solution, three-dimensional, ic]

Three-dimensional Integrated Circuit Design
With vastly increased complexity and functionality in the "nanometer era" (i.e. hundreds of millions of transistors on one chip), increasing the performance of integrated circuits has become a challenging task. This is due primarily to the inevitable increase in the distance among circuit elements and interconnect design solutions have become the greatest determining factor in overall performance.Three-dimensional (3D) integrated circuits (ICs), which contain multiple layers of active devices, have the potential to enhance dramatically chip performance and functionality, while reducing the distance among devices on a chip. They promise solutions to the current "interconnect bottleneck" challenges faced by IC designers. They also may facilitate the integration of heterogeneous materials, devices, and signals. However, before these advantages can be realized, key technology challenges of 3D ICs must be addressed.This is the first book on 3-D integrated circuit design, covering all of the technological and design aspects of this emerging design paradigm, while proposing effective solutions to specific challenging problems concerning the design of three-dimensional integrated circuits. A handy, comprehensive reference or a practical design guide, this book provides a sound foundation for the design of three-dimensional integrated circuits.
-------------------------------------

10010303_234 - 0.951417214675 - science
[synthetic, strategy, biosynthetic, metabolite, biology, secondary, drug, production, system, plug-and-play]

Exploiting plug-and-play synthetic biology for drug discovery and production in microorganisms
One of the most promising applications of synthetic biology is the biosynthesis of new drugs from secondary metabolites. Here, we survey a wide range of strategies that control the activity of biosynthetic modules in the cell in space and time, and illustrate how these strategies can be used to design efficient cellular synthetic production systems. Re-engineered versions of secondary metabolite biosynthetic pathways identified from any genomic sequence can then be inserted into these systems in a plug-and-play fashion. ?? 2011 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved.
-------------------------------------

10007189_234 - 0.755042057695 - technology_and_computing
[design, architecture, system]

Overview of the SpiNNaker System Architecture
SpiNNaker (a contraction of Spiking Neural Network Architecture) is a million-core computing engine whose flagship goal is to be able to simulate the behaviour of aggregates of up to a billion neurons in real time. It consists of an array of ARM9 cores, communicating via packets carried by a custom interconnect fabric. The packets are small (40 or 72 bits), and their transmission is brokered entirely by hardware, giving the overall engine an extremely high bisection bandwidth of over 5 billion packets/s. Three of the principle axioms of parallel machine design -- memory coherence, synchronicity and determinism -- have been discarded in the design without, surprisingly, compromising the ability to perform meaningful computations. A further attribute of the system is the acknowledgement, from the initial design stages, that the sheer size of the implementation will make component failures an inevitable aspect of day-to-day operation, and fault detection and recovery mechanisms have been built into the system at many levels of abstraction. This paper describes the architecture of the machine and outlines the underlying design philosophy; software and applications are to be described in detail elsewhere, and only introduced in passing here as necessary to illuminate the description.
-------------------------------------

10007803_234 - 0.92915917713 - science
[ion, laser, molecular, ionisation, behaviour, molecule]

New prospects for molecular post-ionisation using femtosecond IR lasers
We have investigated the response of a number of small organic molecules to intense infrared femtosecond laser pulses to explore the potential for strong-field post-ionisation in bio-imaging applications. The experimental system has been optimised and characterised using the well-documented ionisation behaviour of xenon. Preliminary work has involved a systematic study of the ionisation–dissociation characteristic of gas phase molecules, to optimise the ionisation step itself. The efficiency of molecular ion and fragment ion production as a function of laser wavelength and intensity has been studied. Here, we report on the behaviour of the toluene molecule, which is typical of several other small organics we have studied. With 800-nm irradiation, a clear transition in behaviour with increasing laser power is observed, favouring molecular ion production. At longer laser wavelengths, the ratio of parent molecular ion to fragment ions is increased by more than one order of magnitude. The molecular ion signal for toluene is also significantly increased on switching from 800-nm to 1300-nm irradiation. We discuss these observations in the context of the underlying ionisation mechanisms.
-------------------------------------

10017469_234 - 0.860998622872 - science
[pre-stress, elastic, metamaterial, cloak, antiplane, property, mechanism, wave, finite, material]

Employing pre-stress to generate finite cloaks for antiplane elastic waves
It is shown that nonlinear elastic pre-stress of neo-Hookean hyperelastic materials can be used as a mechanism to generate finite cloaks and thus render objects near-invisible to incoming antiplane elastic waves. This approach appears to negate the requirement for special cloaking metamaterials with inhomogeneous and anisotropic material properties in this case. These properties are induced naturally by virtue of the pre-stress. This appears to provide a mechanism for broadband cloaking since dispersive effects due to metamaterial microstructure will not arise.
-------------------------------------

10008658_234 - 0.800771541891 - science
[molecular, network, mathematical, molecule]

SYSTEMS BIOLOGY: TOWARDS REALISTIC AND USEFUL MODELS OF MOLECULAR NETWORKS
Molecular biology is shifting focus from single molecules to networks of molecules. This development has changed our way of doing research and is challenging our thinking about cells. Cells turn out be complicated molecular systems displaying multivariate dynamics that can rarely be understood in terms of single molecules. One way to appreciate this complexity is to make mathematical models of signaling, gene, and metabolic network to assess the systemic consequences of specific molecular perturbations. This chapter gives a brief overview of some of the approach in mathematical modeling of molecular networks. We choose to keep the mathematical detail minimal and highlight a number of concepts and approaches that are emerging in the analysis of molecular networks.
-------------------------------------

10009960_234 - 0.924240565574 - medicine
[aspergillosis, fumigatus, patient, allergic, precipitin, asthmatic, antigen, igg, group, elisa]

Evaluation of a rapid enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay for IgG antibodies to Aspergillus fumigatus in the serological diagnosis of allergic aspergillosis.
A range of 6 somatic and culture filtrate antigens of Aspergillus fumigatus were evaluated in a rapid ELISA procedure for anti-A. fumigatus IgG where the component incubation times had been reduced to 10 min. Sera from patients with allergic aspergillosis, patients with suspected allergic aspergillosis, and asthmatic patients with or without A. fumigatus precipitins were tested. For all antigens, levels of anti-A. fumigatus IgG were higher in patients with allergic aspergillosis than in the other 3 groups. Low levels of specific IgG were, however, detected in asthmatic patients who had no precipitins against A. fumigatus. None of the antigen preparations enabled all patients with proven or suspected allergic aspergillosis to be separated from the other 2 groups of asthmatic patients. Positive-negative discrimination in ELISA was achieved by the inclusion of 10 pools of precipitin test-negative sera from the 50 asthmatics without A. fumigatus precipitins. The number of sera that were classed as positive in ELISA ranged from 9 to 15 in the allergic aspergillosis group, depending on the antigen used; in the suspected aspergillosis group, the number of positive reactions ranged from 1 to 8, while in the asthmatics with precipitins, the number ranged from 0 to 2.
-------------------------------------

10011884_234 - 0.759891751937 - medicine
[self-disclosure, clinical, supervisee, psychology, study]

Supervisee Self –Disclosure: A Clinical Psychology Perspective
Clinical supervision is a multi-functional intervention within numerous psychotherapeutic professions, including clinical psychology. It often relies on supervisees' verbal disclosures of pertinent information. There is limited research on supervisee self-disclosure in the UK, and none using clinical psychology populations. This study aimed to address the limitations in the evidence base. It used a constructivist grounded theory methodology to investigate qualified UK clinical psychologists' use of self-disclosure in supervision in order to develop a theoretical understanding of their self-disclosure processes. Ten clinical psychologists from various time points across the career span were recruited to the study. Four core conceptual categories were identified in the analysis as being integral to participants' decision-making processes: ‘Setting the Scene’, ‘Supervisory Relationship’, ‘Using Self-disclosure’ and ‘Reviewing Outcome of Self-disclosure’. These four categories are comprised of a number of subcategories. The study's findings are compared with the current literature base, and it is argued that there are tensions with the scientist–practitioner model as it could be interpreted to encourage an expert stance, which may limit the self-disclosure of qualified supervisees. The implications of this perspective are discussed
-------------------------------------

10018319_234 - 0.900045708148 - science
[il-7, fusion, thymopoietic, protein]

An IL-7 fusion protein that shows increased thymopoietic ability.
The role of IL-7 during thymopoiesis has led to it being the focus of a number of therapeutic interventions. However, its small size and pleiotropic nature present problems for thymus-directed therapies. We have created a fusion molecule between the extracellular N-terminal domain of CCR9 and IL-7, which has the potential to overcome these difficulties. This novel fusion protein retains the thymopoietic activity of IL-7 and the ligand-binding ability of CCR9. As a thymopoietic agent, compared with IL-7, it shows an enhanced retention in the thymus, increased de novo T cell production, and increased thymic output. Old mice receiving the fusion protein show improved CD8 T cell responses and reduced viral load after infection with influenza virus compared with those receiving IL-7. This chimeric molecule offers a novel therapeutic strategy that may result in the production of an effective immunorestorative agent.
-------------------------------------

10003092_234 - 0.899920650139 - medicine
[behavioural, patient, intervention, group, education, change, cvd, cognitive, control, behaviour]

A randomized controlled trial of a cognitive behavioural patient education intervention vs a traditional information leaflet to address the cardiovascular aspects of rheumatoid disease.
Objectives. Cardiovascular disease (CVD) is responsible for 50% of the excess mortality for patients with RA. This study aimed to evaluate a novel 8-week cognitive behavioural patient education intervention designed to effect behavioural change with regard to modifiable CVD risk factors in people with RA.Methods. This was a non-blinded randomized controlled trial with a delayed intervention arm. Participants were randomly assigned to receive the cognitive behavioural education intervention or a control information leaflet at a ratio of 1:1. The primary outcome measure was patient's knowledge of CVD in RA; secondary measures were psychological measures relating to effecting behaviour change, actual behaviour changes and clinical risk factors. Data were collected at baseline, 2 and 6 months.Results. A total of 110 participants consented (52 in the intervention group and 58 in the control group) to participate in the study. At 6 months, those in the intervention group had significantly higher knowledge scores (P < 0.001); improved behavioural intentions to increase exercise (P < 0.001), eat a low-fat diet (P = 0.01) and lose weight (P = 0.06); and lower mean diastolic blood pressure by 3.7 mmHg, whereas the control group's mean diastolic blood pressure increased by 0.8 mmHg. There was no difference between the groups on actual behaviours.Conclusions. Patient education has a significant role to play in CVD risk factor modification for patients with RA, and the detailed development of this programme probably contributed to its successful results. It is disappointing that behaviours, as we measured them, did not change. The challenge, as always, is how to translate behavioural intentions into action. Larger studies, powered specifically to look at behavioural changes, are required.Trial registration. National Institute for Health Research, UKCRN 4566.
-------------------------------------

10003327_234 - 0.772805291173 - science
[abdominal, distension]

Unraveling functional abdominal bloating and distension: the role of thoraco-abdominal accommodation and a physical sign to aid its detection.
Bloating and distension are common complaints in patients with irritable bowel syndrome of which the cause has remained elusive, although it has been shown that the obvious explanation of excessive gas is unlikely. The recent application of technologies such as the gas challenge technique, abdominal inductance plethysmography, CT scanning, as well as electromyography of the diaphragm and anterior abdominal wall, have allowed the situation to be slowly unraveled. It is now seems probable that the pathophysiology of bloating and distension are subtly different with the former having a sensory component whereas mechanical factors, such as disordered abdominal accommodation, contribute more to the latter.
-------------------------------------

10017020_234 - 0.907363579712 - medicine
[patient, artery, depressed, depression, small, subcutaneous, late-life, damage, participant, control]

Cerebrovascular damage in late-life depression is associated with structural and functional abnormalities of subcutaneous small arteries.
Late-life depression is increasingly viewed as a vascular illness because of patients exhibiting characteristic white matter brain lesions and in vivo large artery endothelial dysfunction. However, the "vascular depression" hypothesis pertains to the microvasculature, and this circulation has not been studied in this context. Our objective was to examine structure and function of small subcutaneous arteries in patients with late-life depression. Thus, 16 patients aged 71.8±4.0 years with late-life depression were compared with 15 control participants aged 72.1±5.9 years. There were similar cardiovascular profiles between the 2 groups. All of the participants underwent MRI brain scans and subcutaneous gluteal fat biopsy from which small arteries were isolated and studied using pressure myography. Cerebral microvascular damage in depressed patients was confirmed by assessment of basal ganglia Virchow-Robin space scores (depressed patients 3.9±1.7 versus controls: 2.5±1.6; P=0.01). Contractility to norepinephrine was equivalent in both groups, but relaxation of the small arteries to acetylcholine was significantly reduced in depressed patients (84.0±4.0%) compared with control participants (96.0±1.4%; P=0.012). This difference in arterial relaxation was reduced but not entirely eliminated when NO synthase was inhibited. Depressed patients also exhibited hypertrophic wall growth with an increase in medial cross-sectional area (P=0.035, multiple ANOVA and wall thickness; P=0.04, multiple ANOVA). In conclusion, despite similar cardiovascular profiles, depressed patients with cerebral microvascular damage show abnormalities of subcutaneous small artery structure and function.
-------------------------------------

10005258_234 - 0.867305423316 - science
[keloid, cell, scar, hsc, extralesional, msc, stem]

Differential distribution of haematopoietic and nonhaematopoietic progenitor cells in intralesional and extralesional keloid: do keloid scars provide a niche for nonhaematopoietic mesenchymal stem cells?
BACKGROUND: Keloid disease is a benign, quasineoplastic disease with a high recurrence rate. Mesenchymal-like stem cells (MLSC) have previously been demonstrated in keloid scars and may be involved in keloid pathobiology. However, as these cells have only been examined by single colour fluorescence activated cell sorting (FACS) alone, they need to be more comprehensively characterized so that the key cellular contributors to keloid scars can be better understood. OBJECTIVES: To identify and characterize MLSC in intralesional and extralesional keloid, and to distinguish haematopoietic stem cells (HSC) from mesenchymal stem cells (MSC). METHODS AND PATIENTS: Punch biopsies from intralesional (top, middle and margin) and extralesional keloid scar sites were obtained from 17 patients with a keloid. Multicolour FACS analysis using antibodies specific for HSC markers CD34 and CD117 and MSC markers CD13, CD29, CD44 and CD90 was performed on freshly isolated keloid scar cells and on passage 0 and 1 cells. This was complemented by real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and immunohistological in situ analyses. RESULTS: Keloid scars contain distinct subpopulations of MLSCs. Cells positive for CD13, CD29, CD44 and CD90 were found to be significantly (P<0·05) higher in the top and middle compartments of keloid scars compared with extralesional skin, where cells positive for CD34, CD90 and CD117 (representing HSCs) predominated. A unique population of CD34+ cells (cells positive for CD13, CD29, CD34, CD44 and CD90) were found in keloid scars and in extralesional skin. FACS and quantitative PCR analysis showed that many of the MSC markers were progressively downregulated and all HSC markers were lost during extended keloid fibroblast culture up to passage 1. CONCLUSION: We have found distinct subpopulations of haematopoietic and nonhaematopoietic MSC in keloid scars, whereby HSC accumulate extralesionally, while keloids seem to provide a niche environment for nonhaematopoietic MSC. Future therapy of keloids may have to target differentially both stem cell populations in order to deprive these tumours of their regenerative cell pools.
-------------------------------------

10009766_234 - 0.781818818996 - science
[neutrophil, percentage, binding, mean, gm-csf, yeast, ingestion, beigelius]

GM-CSF-modulated phagocytosis of Trichosporon beigelii by human neutrophils.
Trichosporon beigelii has emerged as a lethal opportunist pathogen in granulocytopenic and corticosteroid-treated patients. Little is known of the host defence mechanisms against this yeast. The interaction between human neutrophils and serum-opsonised T. beigelii and the effect of GM-CSF on binding and ingestion of the yeast by neutrophils were investigated by a microscopic analysis of neutrophil monolayers stained with FITC-Concanavalin A. Positive staining with FITC-Concanavalin A distinguished between intracellular and extracellular yeast cells. Binding of T. beigelii to neutrophils was an energy- and complement-dependent process involving movement of actin in the neutrophil cytoskeleton. The mean percentage binding of T. beigelii was 37.5% and the mean binding index (BI) was 1.30 whereas the mean percentage ingestion was 3.5% and the mean phagocytic index (PI) was 1.34. GM-CSF increased percentage ingestion of T. beigelli from 2.8% to 30.5% and the PI was increased from 1.3 to 1.86. The percentage binding was 36.8% and the mean BI was 1.3 in control experiments compared with 49.3% and 1.6, respectively, in the presence of GM-CSF. In conclusion, GM-CSF significantly increased percentage ingestion of opsonised T. beigelii by neutrophils, but its effect on percentage binding of the yeast was not statistically significant.
-------------------------------------

10011143_234 - 0.70720742318 - science
[lens, liquid, refractive, power, diameter, optical, crystal, voltage, model, simulation]

Optimization of refractive liquid crystal lenses using an efficient multigrid simulation.
A multigrid computational model has been developed to assess the performance of refractive liquid crystal lenses, which is up to 40 times faster than previous techniques. Using this model, the optimum geometries producing an ideal parabolic voltage distribution were deduced for refractive liquid crystal lenses with diameters from 1 to 9 mm. The ratio of insulation thickness to lens diameter was determined to be 1:2 for small diameter lenses, tending to 1:3 for larger lenses. The model is used to propose a new method of lens operation with lower operating voltages needed to induce specific optical powers. The operating voltages are calculated for the induction of optical powers between + 1.00 D and + 3.00 D in a 3 mm diameter lens, with the speed of the simulation facilitating the optimization of the refractive index profile. We demonstrate that the relationship between additional applied voltage and optical power is approximately linear for optical powers under + 3.00 D. The versatility of the computational simulation has also been demonstrated by modeling of in-plane electrode liquid crystal devices.
-------------------------------------

10017511_234 - 0.818551376804 - science
[gene, cell, stem, embryonic, datum, consistent, early, experimental, grn, regulatory]

Early gene regulation of osteogenesis in embryonic stem cells
The early gene regulatory networks (GRNs) that mediate stem cell differentiation are complex, and the underlying regulatory associations can be difficult to map accurately. In this study, the expression profiles of the genes Dlx5,Msx2 and Runx2 in mouse embryonic stem cells were monitored over a 48 hour period after exposure to the growth factors BMP2 and TGFb 1. Candidate GRNs of early osteogenesis were constructed based on published experimental findings and simulation results of Boolean and ordinary differential equation models were compared with our experimental data in order to test the validity of these models. Three gene regulatory networks were found to be consistent with the data, one of these networks exhibited sustained oscillation, a behaviour which is consistent with the general view of embryonic stem cell plasticity. The work cycle presented in this paper illustrates how mathematical modelling can be used to elucidate from gene expression profiles GRNs that are consistent with experimental data.
-------------------------------------

10007987_234 - 0.705757818733 - technology_and_computing
[binary, channel, high-magnification]

Microlensing Binaries Discovered through High-magnification Channel
DOI: 10.1088/0004-637X/746/2/127; eprintid: arXiv:1109.3295
-------------------------------------

10007859_234 - 0.855536630662 - medicine
[cancer, breast, patient, health, treatment, woman, older, surgical, difference, tumour]

Surgical treatment decisions for older patients; the influence of tumour characteristics, patient health and choice.
Purpose:Women aged ≥70 years experience highest incidence and worse relative survival for breast cancer in England1,2. Substantial differences in breast cancer treatment by age have been demonstrated3. However, national UK policy/ guidelines indicate that management may justifiably differ for older patients on the basis of their tumour characteristics, health and choice4. We investigate whether the disparity in treatment for breast cancer by age persists once differences in these variables are adjusted for. The ability of a range of pre-treatment health measures to predict post surgical complications and HRQoL will also be tested with a view to developing accurate health measures into treatment decision making tools.Methods:Our previous studies investigated the role of tumour characteristics and health in age-related treatment differences. We undertook:(1) a retrospective case note review of women aged 65 years, resident in Greater Manchester with invasive breast cancer registered in 1999 (n = 480) adjusting for differences in tumour characteristics5(2) a pilot prospective study of patients diagnosed in 2002-3 (n = 76) adjusting for co-morbidity and general health (represented by Activities of Daily Living)6Results:Study 1: Older women were less likely to receive standard management compared to younger women for all indicators investigated. For example compared to women aged 65-69 years, women aged 80 years with operable (stage 1-3a) breast cancer had increased odds of not receiving primary surgery (OR = 43.0, 95% CI: 9.7-191.3).Study 2: The odds of patients aged ³80 years with operable breast cancer undergoing surgery were reduced by a factor of 44 (OR: 0.023, 95% CI: 0.001-0.361) compared to patients aged 65-79 years.Conclusions & Current Studies: These results indicate that older women in the UK are less likely to receive standard management for breast cancer, compared to younger women and this disparity is not explained by differences in tumour characteristics and general health. Our current studies investigate the role of patient choice in surgical treatment decisions for older breast cancer patients. The role of patient health is also being investigated in a larger sample and pre-treatment health measures which best predict post surgical complications and HRQoL for older breast cancer patients are being identified. In order to do this we have established large prospective cohorts of women aged ≥65 diagnosed with early stage invasive breast cancer in England from 2010-2012 (812 of our 900 overall target sample has currently been recruited). We are collecting data via pre- treatment interviews (with both patients and their surgeons), post surgical surveys and case note reviews. These cohort studies will establish the extent to which the difference in treatment for older breast cancer patients can be explained by patient choice, health and tumour characteristics. Health measures which accurately predict outcome for surgery in the cohorts will then be developed into a surgical treatment decision making tool in a first phase RCT of a complex intervention aiming to base surgical treatment decisions on patient health, choice and acceptable risk of adverse outcome.References:1 Office for National Statistics. Cancer statistics registrations: Registrations of cancer diagnosed in 2008, England. Series MB1 No. 39. www.statistics.gov.uk . 2010. 2 Cancer Research UK. Breast Cancer Survival Statistics. http://info.cancerresearchuk.org/cancerstats/types/breast/survival/#age . 2009. 3 Lawrence, G, Kearins, O, Lagord, C, Cheung, S, Sidhu, J, and Sagar, C. The Second All Breast Cancer Report.  2011.  National Cancer Intelligence Network.4 Department of Health. Cancer Reform Strategy.  2007. London. 5 Lavelle K, Todd C, Moran A, Howell A, Bundred N, Campbell M (2007b) Non-standard management of breast cancer increases with age in the UK: a population based cohort of women ≥65 years. British Journal of Cancer 96: 1197-12036 Lavelle K, Moran A, Howell A, Bundred N, Campbell M, Todd C (2007a) Older women with operable breast cancer are less likely to have surgery. British Journal of Surgery 94: 1209-1215
-------------------------------------

10018286_234 - 0.804284955365 - medicine
[infection, pulmonary, immune]

Colonic bacterial infection abrogates eosinophilic pulmonary disease.
Induction of immunity to one pathogen in the lungs modifies the microenvironment and alters immunopathological changes that result from a second, unrelated pulmonary infection. However, it is unclear whether immunity generated at distant sites also affects lung immune responses. Here, we show that infection with the gut-restricted bacterium Citrobacter rodentium modifies immunopathological changes that result from pulmonary Cryptococcus neoformans infection. Th2 cytokine-driven pulmonary eosinophilia induced by C. neoformans infection was reduced, and the enhanced Th1 cytokine environment afforded more-rapid clearance of the fungus in C. rodentium-immune mice. The activated and intraepithelial (CD103+) T cell populations that expand after C. neoformans infection were diminished in C. rodentium-immune mice. T cell cross-reactivity was absent, but cross-reactive antibodies were detected. It is of importance to the "hygiene hypothesis" that these data indicate that an immune response induced by a gut-restricted pathogen can modify the immune outcome after pulmonary infection, suggesting that cell-phenotype modifications occur across mucosal sites.
-------------------------------------

10010350_234 - 0.795278495589 - science
[gene, secondary, metabolite, cluster, genome, antismash, analysis, drug]

{AntiSMASH:} Rapid identification, annotation and analysis of secondary metabolite biosynthesis gene clusters in bacterial and fungal genome sequences
Bacterial and fungal secondary metabolism is a rich source of novel bioactive compounds with potential pharmaceutical applications as antibiotics, anti-tumor drugs or cholesterol-lowering drugs. To find new drug candidates, microbiologists are increasingly relying on sequencing genomes of a wide variety of microbes. However, rapidly and reliably pinpointing all the potential gene clusters for secondary metabolites in dozens of newly sequenced genomes has been extremely challenging, due to their biochemical heterogeneity, the presence of unknown enzymes and the dispersed nature of the necessary specialized bioinformatics tools and resources. Here, we present {antiSMASH} (antibiotics \& Secondary Metabolite Analysis Shell), the first comprehensive pipeline capable of identifying biosynthetic loci covering the whole range of known secondary metabolite compound classes (polyketides, non-ribosomal peptides, terpenes, aminoglycosides, aminocoumarins, indolocarbazoles, lantibiotics, bacteriocins, nucleosides, beta-lactams, butyrolactones, siderophores, melanins and others). It aligns the identified regions at the gene cluster level to their nearest relatives from a database containing all other known gene clusters, and integrates or cross-links all previously available secondary-metabolite specific gene analysis methods in one interactive view. {antiSMASH} is available at http://antismash.secondarymetabolites.org. ?? 2011 The Author(s).
-------------------------------------

10017180_234 - 0.762429725835 - science
[amphotericin, 5-fluorocytosine, l-1, albican, combination, neutrophil, cell]

Intracellular killing of Candida albicans by human neutrophils is potentiated by exposure to combinations of amphotericin B and 5-fluorocytosine.
Combination treatment with amphotericin B and 5-fluorocytosine is synergistic and has become clinically useful in the treatment of various forms of systemic candidosis. The synergy between these two compounds may be explained in part by their combined effect on the interaction between fungal cells and host phagocytes. Pretreatment of Candida albicans for 2 h with either amphotericin B or 5-fluorocytosine or the two agents in combination did not inhibit or enhance phagocytosis by glass-adherent human neutrophils (P greater than 0.05). Intracellular killing of pretreated yeast cells was not influenced by antifungals alone (P greater than 0.05), but pretreatment of C. albicans with 5.0 mg l-1 amphotericin B + 10 l-1 5-fluorocytosine or 5.0 mg l-1 amphotericin B + 50 mg l-1 5-fluorocytosine significantly enhanced the ability of neutrophils to kill the number of viable yeast cells intracellularly (P less than 0.001).
-------------------------------------

10018375_234 - 0.901893083458 - science
[receptor, bacterial, antibacterial, neutrophil, allergic]

Altered regulation of Toll-like receptor responses impairs antibacterial immunity in the allergic lung.
The lung is colonized by commensal bacteria, some of which are associated with asthma exacerbations. Using the intranasal house-dust mite-sensitized mouse model of allergic airway disease, we show an imbalance in novel antibacterial pathways that culminates in a reduction in neutrophil recruitment to the airspaces and leads to bacterial invasion and dissemination. The expression of TREM (Triggering Receptor Expressed on Myeloid cells)-1 that amplifies Toll-like receptor (TLR) signaling and TREM-2 that inhibits this process is reversed. Furthermore, endogenous TLR inhibitors (A20, Tollip, SOCS1, and IRAK-M) and proteins involved in receptor recycling (TRIAD3) are raised. Consequently, the production of neutrophil chemoattractants is reduced. Intranasal administration of either chemokine restores the ability to recruit neutrophils, which prevents bacterial invasion. A background of allergic airway disease therefore exacerbates bacterial infection by altering key antibacterial innate immune pathways that are amenable to therapeutic intervention.
-------------------------------------

10017782_234 - 0.917919083938 - science
[substrate, gold, carbohydrate, surface, maldi-tof, glycosyltransferase, enzyme, array]

MALDI-ToF MS Analysis of Glycosyltransferase Activities on Gold Surface Arrays
Glycan-processing enzymes such as glycosyltransferases and glycosidases are responsible for the makeup of the glycome. The definition of their substrate specificities is, therefore, a central task in glycomics. In addition, these enzymes are themselves useful synthetic tools for the generation of complex carbohydrate structures as an alternative to tedious chemical synthesis. There has been great interest in using microarrays for studying these glycoenzymes because it allows the specificity of the enzyme to be probed against a panel of immobilized potential substrates, and also expands the repertoire of sugar arrays available for further carbohydrate–protein interaction studies. In particular, self-assembled monolayers (SAMs) of alkanethiols on gold surfaces have proven to be a valuable platform for such studies due to their robustness and their biocompatible, well-defined structure. Furthermore, a direct observation of the change in mass of immobilized substrates due to enzymatic processing is possible through label-free MALDI-ToF MS (matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry) technique. In this chapter, we describe the preparation of SAMs-coated gold surface arrays presenting carbohydrate or (glyco)peptide substrates, either pre-formed or directly synthesized on-chip, and MALDI-ToF MS analysis of glycosyltransferase activities on these immobilized substrates.
-------------------------------------

10007776_234 - 0.848117833057 - science
[tnf, oscillation, stimulation, sustained, nf-b, response, model, intensity, value, system]

A systematic survey of the response of a model NF-κB signalling pathway to TNFα stimulation
White's lab established that strong, continuous stimulation with tumour necrosis factor-α (TNFα) can induce sustained oscillations in the subcellular localisation of the transcription factor nuclear factor κB (NF-κB). But the intensity of the TNFα signal varies substantially, from picomolar in the blood plasma of healthy organisms to nanomolar in diseased states. We report on a systematic survey using computational bifurcation theory to explore the relationship between the intensity of TNFα stimulation and the existence of sustained NF-κB oscillations. Using a deterministic model developed by Ashall et al. in 2009, we find that the system's responses to TNFα are characterised by a supercritical Hopf bifurcation point: above a critical intensity of TNFα the system exhibits sustained oscillations in NF-kB localisation. For TNFα below this critical value, damped oscillations are observed. This picture depends, however, on the values of the model's other parameters. When the values of certain reaction rates are altered the response of the signalling pathway to TNFα stimulation changes: in addition to the sustained oscillations induced by high-dose stimulation, a second oscillatory regime appears at much lower doses. Finally, we define scores to quantify the sensitivity of the dynamics of the system to variation in its parameters and use these scores to establish that the qualitative dynamics are most sensitive to the details of NF-κB mediated gene transcription.
-------------------------------------

10011628_234 - 0.882610095646 - science
[strain, triclosan, virulence, formation, rate, biofilm, growth, concentration, dnase, coagulase]

Attenuated virulence and biofilm formation in Staphylococcus aureus following sublethal exposure to triclosan.
Subeffective exposure of Staphylococcus aureus to the biocide triclosan can reportedly induce a small-colony variant (SCV) phenotype. S. aureus SCVs are characterized by low growth rates, reduced pigmentation, and lowered antimicrobial susceptibility. While they may exhibit enhanced intracellular survival, there are conflicting reports regarding their pathogenicity. The current study reports the characteristics of an SCV-like strain of S. aureus created by repeated passage on sublethal triclosan concentrations. S. aureus ATCC 6538 (the passage 0 P0 strain) was serially exposed 10 times to concentration gradients of triclosan to generate strain P10. This strain was then further passaged 10 times on triclosan-free medium (designated strain ×10). The MICs and minimum bactericidal concentrations of triclosan for P0, P10, and ×10 were determined, and growth rates in biofilm and planktonic cultures were measured. Hemolysin, DNase, and coagulase activities were measured, and virulence was determined using a Galleria mellonella pathogenicity model. Strain P10 exhibited decreased susceptibility to triclosan and characteristics of an SCV phenotype, including a considerably reduced growth rate and the formation of pinpoint colonies. However, this strain also had delayed coagulase production, had impaired hemolysis (P < 0.01), was defective in biofilm formation and DNase activity, and displayed significantly attenuated virulence. Colony size, hemolysis, coagulase activity, and virulence were only partially restored in strain ×10, whereas the planktonic growth rate was fully restored. However, ×10 was at least as defective in biofilm formation and DNase production as P10. These data suggest that although repeated exposure to triclosan may result in an SCV-like phenotype, this is not necessarily associated with increased virulence and adapted bacteria may exhibit other functional deficiencies.
-------------------------------------

10018304_234 - 0.71031390705 - medicine
[lung, infection]

Respiratory viral infections: knowledge based therapeutics.
Lung viral infections continue to kill millions of people worldwide. Virus-specific properties, replication kinetics and longevity affect the subsequent vigour of innate and adaptive immunity, which contribute to clinical manifestations. The point at which lung innate immunity activates is different between individuals and is determined by age, genetics, underlying conditions and infection history. On resolution of virus-induced lung disease an 'altered state of homeostasis' exists that in turn affects the next antigenic challenge. The last two years has produced a plethora of studies on the resolution of inflammatory lung disease; highlighting potential for immune modulation. In the future a more precise etiological diagnosis, combined with a knowledge of co-morbidities and an immune signature will lead to the development of more specifically targeted therapeutics.
-------------------------------------

10004331_234 - 0.755785862336 - science
[recombination, defect, silicon, solar, multi-crystalline, material, grain, point, cell]

Recombination via point defects and their complexes in solar silicon
Electronic grade Czochralski and float zone silicon in the as grown state have a very low concentration of recombination generation centers (typically <1010âcmâ3). Consequently, in integrated circuit technologies using such material, electrically active inadvertent impurities and structural defects are rarely detectable. The quest for cheap photovoltaic cells has led to the use of less pure silicon, multi-crystalline material, and low cost processing for solar applications. Cells made in this way have significant extrinsic recombination mechanisms. In this paper we review recombination involving defects and impurities in single crystal and in multi-crystalline solar silicon. Our main techniques for this work are recombination lifetime mapping measurements using microwave detected photoconductivity decay and variants of deep level transient spectroscopy (DLTS). In particular, we use Laplace DLTS to distinguish between isolated point defects, small precipitate complexes and decorated extended defects. We compare the behavior of some common metallic contaminants in solar silicon in relation to their effect on carrier lifetime and cell efficiency. Finally, we consider the role of hydrogen passivation in relation to transition metal contaminants, grain boundaries and dislocations. We conclude that recombination via point defects can be significant but in most multi-crystalline material the dominant recombination path is via decorated dislocation clusters within grains with little contribution to the overall recombination from grain boundaries.
-------------------------------------

10018415_234 - 0.701167057736 - science
[kappa, phase]

Spin-1/2 Heisenberg antiferromagnet on an anisotropic kagome lattice
We use the coupled-cluster method to study the zero-temperature properties of an extended two-dimensional Heisenberg antiferromagnet formed from spin-1/2 moments on an infinite spatially anisotropic kagome lattice of corner-sharing isosceles triangles, with nearest-neighbor bonds only. The bonds have exchange constants $J_{1} > 0$ along two of the three lattice directions and $J_2 ≡ \kappa J_{1} > 0$ along the third. In the classical limit, the ground-state (GS) phase for $\kappa < 1/2$ has collinear ferrimagnetic (Neel*) order where the $J_2$-coupled chain spins are ferromagnetically ordered in one direction with the remaining spins aligned in the opposite direction, while for $\kappa > 1/2$ there exists an infinite GS family of canted ferrimagnetic spin states, which are energetically degenerate.  For the spin-1/2 case, we find that quantum analogs of both these classical states continue to exist as stable GS phases in some regions of the anisotropy parameter $\kappa$, namely, for $0 < \kappa < \kappa_{c_1}$ for the Neel* state and for (at least part of) the region $\kappa > \kappa_{c_2}$ for the canted phase. However, they are now separated by a paramagnetic phase without either sort of magnetic order in the region $\kappa_{c_1} < \kappa < \kappa_{c_2}$, which includes the isotropic kagome point  $\kappa = 1$ where the stable GS phase is nowbelieved to be a topological ($Z_2$) spin liquid. Our best numerical estimates are $\kappa_{c_1} = 0.515 \pm 0.015$ and $\kappa_{c_2} = 1.82 \pm 0.03$.
-------------------------------------

10008613_234 - 0.790487818865 - science
[cell, skin]

In vivo assays of langerhans cell migration.
The skin is an immunologically active tissue; the integrated skin immune system comprises epidermal Langerhans cells (LC), dermal dendritic cells (DC), tissue macrophages, mast cells, and T lymphocytes in transit. Cutaneous immune function is orchestrated through the action of cytokines produced locally in the skin by LC, keratinocytes, and other cell types (1-3).
-------------------------------------

10005573_234 - 0.888101436761 - medicine
[hypnotherapy, patient]

Controlled trial of hypnotherapy in the treatment of severe refractory irritable-bowel syndrome.
30 patients with severe refractory irritable-bowel syndrome were randomly allocated to treatment with either hypnotherapy or psychotherapy and placebo. The psychotherapy patients showed a small but significant improvement in abdominal pain, abdominal distension, and general well-being but not in bowel habit. The hypnotherapy patients showed a dramatic improvement in all features, the difference between the two groups being highly significant. In the hypnotherapy group no relapses were recorded during the 3-month follow-up period, and no substitution symptoms were observed.
-------------------------------------

10009966_234 - 0.76824013828 - science
[fumigatus, antigen, antibody, elisa, serum, rapid, binding, igg]

Antigen and antibody attachment in ELISA for Aspergillus fumigatus IgG antibodies.
Four commercial antigen extracts of Aspergillus fumigatus were evaluated for use in a rapid enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) for anti-A. fumigatus IgG. Initial binding of both somatic and culture filtrate preparations to a polyvinyl chloride solid phase was concentration dependent and increased with incubation time. Antigen binding to the solid phase was reproducible. Binding of A. fumigatus precipitin-positive serum to bound antigen was rapid. All four A. fumigatus antigens demonstrated similar dose-response curves when tested against pooled sera containing a high titre of A. fumigatus antibodies. Detectable activity in precipitin test-negative sera decreased rapidly with dilution. All the antigen preparations were found to be suitable for ELISA procedures and permit the rapid determination of IgG antibodies to A. fumigatus.
-------------------------------------

10007014_234 - 0.849515898785 - science
[ice, cloud, particle, concentration, model, high, process]

Ice formation and development in aged, wintertime cumulus over the UK: observations and modelling
In situ high resolution aircraft measurements of cloud microphysical properties were made in coordination with ground based remote sensing observations of a line of small cumulus clouds, using Radar and Lidar, as part of the Aerosol Properties, PRocesses And InfluenceS on the Earth's climate (APPRAISE) project. A narrow but extensive line (similar to 100 km long) of shallow convective clouds over the southern UK was studied. Cloud top temperatures were observed to be higher than -8 A degrees C, but the clouds were seen to consist of supercooled droplets and varying concentrations of ice particles. No ice particles were observed to be falling into the cloud tops from above. Current parameterisations of ice nuclei (IN) numbers predict too few particles will be active as ice nuclei to account for ice particle concentrations at the observed, near cloud top, temperatures (-7.5 A degrees C). The role of mineral dust particles, consistent with concentrations observed near the surface, acting as high temperature IN is considered important in this case. It was found that very high concentrations of ice particles (up to 100 L-1) could be produced by secondary ice particle production providing the observed small amount of primary ice (about 0.01 L-1) was present to initiate it. This emphasises the need to understand primary ice formation in slightly supercooled clouds. It is shown using simple calculations that the Hallett-Mossop process (HM) is the likely source of the secondary ice. Model simulations of the case study were performed with the Aerosol Cloud and Precipitation Interactions Model (ACPIM). These parcel model investigations confirmed the HM process to be a very important mechanism for producing the observed high ice concentrations. A key step in generating the high concentrations was the process of collision and coalescence of rain drops, which once formed fell rapidly through the cloud, collecting ice particles which caused them to freeze and form instant large riming particles. The broadening of the droplet size-distribution by collision-coalescence was, therefore, a vital step in this process as this was required to generate the large number of ice crystals observed in the time available. Simulations were also performed with the WRF (Weather, Research and Forecasting) model. The results showed that while HM does act to increase the mass and number concentration of ice particles in these model simulations it was not found to be critical for the formation of precipitation. However, the WRF simulations produced a cloud top that was too cold and this, combined with the assumption of continual replenishing of ice nuclei removed by ice crystal formation, resulted in too many ice crystals forming by primary nucleation compared to the observations and parcel modelling.
-------------------------------------

10005588_234 - 0.936742821251 - medicine
[patient, reflux, ph, exertional, normal, gastro-oesophageal, hour, oesophageal, exercise, score]

Exertional gastro-oesophageal reflux: a mechanism for symptoms in patients with angina pectoris and normal coronary angiograms.
During 24 hour oesophageal pH monitoring 52 patients who had angina pectoris and normal coronary angiograms underwent exercise testing, as far as their symptoms allowed, on a treadmill to determine whether gastro-oesophageal reflux occurred during exertion. In 11 patients the 24 hour oesophageal pH score was abnormally high; 10 of these showed exertional gastro-oesophageal reflux, and in nine this was associated with their usual chest pain. A further 13 patients had a normal 24 hour pH score but had exertional reflux coincident with chest pain during exercise testing. The mean lower oesophageal sphincter pressure in both of these groups of patients was appreciably lower than that in 28 patients who had a normal 24 hour pH score and no exertional reflux. These findings suggest that exertional gastro-oesophageal reflux accounts for the symptoms of a large proportion of patients who have angina pectoris and normal coronary angiograms and that oesophageal pH monitoring during exercise testing on a treadmill enables this group of patients to be identified.
-------------------------------------

10004031_234 - 0.743408425738 - technology_and_computing
[datum, beam, generation]

Imaging and analysis of 3-D structure using a dual beam FIB.
The application of focused ion beam instrumentation in the generation of three-dimensional microstructural data is described. The methodologies used to acquire and manipulate this data are explained, and the technique is illustrated by a number of examples from the material sciences. The limitations of this method, and practical pointers to the generation of meaningful data, are also discussed.
-------------------------------------

10005171_234 - 0.706619609403 - technology_and_computing
[3-d, clock, circuit, design, distribution, topology]

Clock Distribution Networks in 3-D Integrated Systems
3-D integration is an important technology that addresses fundamental limitations in on-chip interconnects. Several design issues related to 3-D circuits, such as multiplane synchronization, however, need to be addressed. A comparison of three 3-D clock distribution network topologies is presented in this paper. Good agreement is shown between the modeled and experimental results of a 3-D test circuit composed of three device planes. Successful operation of the 3-D test circuit at 1.4 GHz is demonstrated. Clock skew, clock delay, signal slew, and power dissipation measurements for the different clock topologies are also provided. The measurements suggest that each topology provides certain advantages and disadvantages in terms of different performance criteria. The proper choice, consequently, of a clock distribution network is not dictated by a single design objective but rather by the overall 3-D system design requirements including availability of resources and number of bonded planes.
-------------------------------------

100116_102 - 0.751725446588 - society
[social, ethical]

Safe recruitment, social justice, and ethical practice: should people who have criminal convictions be allowed to train as social workers?
<p>Decision making in relation to admitting people to train as social workers is, either explicitly or implicitly, an ethical activity. This paper considers ethical and practical issues related to the processing of applicants to social work training in England who have criminal convictions. These issues are explored by focusing on policies that strengthen regulations that exclude ex-offenders from working with children and vulnerable adults. The admissions processes for social work education are analysed in terms of how they contribute to, or counteract, processes of social exclusion. The advice and guidance from the General Social Care Council of England (GSCC) is summarised and analysed. A case study of a social work education partnership grounds the ethical discussion by illustrating the complexities of engaging with combating social exclusion whilst seeking to ensure that the public is protected.</p>
-------------------------------------

10004174_234 - 0.81534655681 - science
[particle, cloud, aerosol, organic, droplet, compound, water, concentration, ambient, effect]

Tight coupling of particle size, number and composition in atmospheric cloud droplet activation
The substantial uncertainty in the indirect effect of aerosol particles on radiative forcing in large part arises from the influences of atmospheric aerosol particles on (i) the brightness of clouds, exerting significant shortwave cooling with no appreciable compensation in the long wave, and on (ii) their ability to precipitate, with implications for cloud cover and lifetime. Predicting the ambient conditions at which aerosol particles may become cloud droplets is largely reliant on an equilibrium relationship derived by Kohler (1936). However, the theoretical basis of the relationship restricts its application to particles solely comprising involatile compounds and water, whereas a substantial fraction of particles in the real atmosphere will contain potentially thousands of semi-volatile organic compounds in addition to containing semi-volatile inorganic components such as ammonium nitrate. We show that equilibration of atmospherically reasonable concentrations of organic compounds with a growing particle as the ambient humidity increases has potentially larger implications on cloud droplet formation than any other equilibrium compositional dependence, owing to inextricable linkage between the aerosol composition, a particles size and concentration under ambient conditions. Whilst previous attempts to account for co-condensation of gases other than water vapour have been restricted to one inorganic condensate, our method demonstrates that accounting for the co-condensation of any number of organic compounds substantially decreases the saturation ratio of water vapour required for droplet activation. This effect is far greater than any other compositional dependence; more so even than the unphysical effect of surface tension reduction in aqueous organic mixtures, ignoring differences in bulk and surface surfactant concentrations.
-------------------------------------

10005645_234 - 0.757538826651 - medicine
[bowel, syndrome, disorder, irritable, patient]

The irritable bowel syndrome.
Irritable bowel syndrome is a common disorder varying in severity from trivial to incapacitating. The pathophysiology and epidemiology are gradually being unravelled and it is now becoming apparent just how poor the quality of life of some of these patients can be. It is no longer acceptable practice to diagnose the condition and discharge the patient on a high fibre diet, particularly as the latter can often make the situation worse. Although hard to treat, worthwhile responses can be achieved by careful targeting of therapy to the many different facets of the disorder.
-------------------------------------

10017809_234 - 0.793760197921 - science
[mouse, peritoneal, response, tgf1, factor, fibrosis, strain]

Transforming growth factor β-induced peritoneal fibrosis is mouse strain dependent.
BackgroundEncapsulating peritoneal sclerosis (EPS) is a rare but devastating complication of peritoneal dialysis. The etiology is unclear, but genetic predisposition may be a contributing factor. We used adenovirus-mediated gene transfer of transforming growth factor (TGF) β1 to the peritoneum in four genetically distinct laboratory mouse strains to assess differences in fibrogenic response.MethodsMice from four genetic backgrounds (C57BL/6J, DBA/2J, C3H/HeJ and SJL/J) received an intraperitoneal injection of an adenovirus expressing TGFβ1 (AdTGFβ1) or control adenovirus (AdDL) and were assessed 4 and 10 days after infection. Submesothelial thickening, angiogenesis and gene expression were quantified from peritoneal tissue. Protein was extracted from omental tissue and assessed for collagen, E-cadherin and TGFβ signaling pathway proteins.ResultsThere was a graded response among the mouse strains to the peritoneal overexpression of TGFβ1. TGFβ1 induced a significant fibrogenic response in the C57BL/6J mice, whereas the SJL/J mice were resistant. The DBA/2J and the C3H/HeJ mice had intermediate responses. A similar graded response was seen in collagen protein levels in the omental tissue and in fibrosis-associated gene expression. TGFβ type 1 receptor and SMAD signaling pathways appeared to be intact in all the mouse strains.ConclusionsThere were significant differences in mouse strain susceptibility to peritoneal fibrosis, suggesting that genetic factors may play a role in the development of peritoneal fibrosis and possibly EPS. As early TGFβ1 signaling mechanisms appear to be intact, we hypothesize that fibrosis resistance in the SJL/J mice lies further down the wound-healing cascade or in an alternate, non-SMAD pathway.
-------------------------------------

10007559_234 - 0.857025205909 - medicine
[patient, ci, anti-tnf, skin, cancer, cohort, incidence, nbdmard, ra, therapy]

The influence of anti-TNF therapy upon incidence of keratinocyte skin cancer in patients with rheumatoid arthritis: longitudinal results from the British Society for Rheumatology Biologics Register.
OBJECTIVES: To compare the risk of keratinoctye skin cancer (basal cell carcinoma (BCC) and squamous cell carcinoma (SCC)) in patients treated for rheumatoid arthritis (RA) compared with the general population, and to determine whether anti-tumour necrosis factor (TNF) therapy exacerbates this risk. METHODS: Patients with RA enrolled in the British Society for Rheumatology Biologics Register, a prospective national cohort established in 2001 to monitor the safety of anti-TNF, were followed until 2008. 11 881 patients treated with anti-TNF were compared with 3629 patients receiving non-biological disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs (nbDMARD). Standardised incidence ratios (SIR) were calculated for each cohort and rates between cohorts were compared using Cox proportional HR, adjusted using inverse probability of treatment weighting. RESULTS: SIR for skin cancer was increased in both cohorts compared with the English population: SIR 1.72 (95% CI 1.43 to 2.04) anti-TNF; 1.83 (95% CI 1.30 to 2.50) nbDMARD only. In patients without previous skin cancer, BCC incidence per 100 000 patient-years was 342 (95% CI 290 to 402) after anti-TNF and 407 (95% CI 288 to 558) after nbDMARD. HR after anti-TNF adjusted for treatment weighting was 0.95 (95% CI 0.53 to 1.71). SCC incidence per 100 000 patient-years: anti-TNF 53 (95% CI 33 to 79); nbDMARD 43 (95% CI 12 to 110); adjusted HR 1.16 (95% CI 0.35 to 3.84). CONCLUSIONS: Skin cancers were increased among treated patients with RA. No evidence was found that anti-TNF therapy exacerbates the risk of BCC or SCC but this cannot be excluded. Patients with RA should use sun protection and be monitored for skin cancer.
-------------------------------------

10005613_234 - 0.804324119282 - science
[nicardipine, motility, effect, colonic]

Effect of intra-colonic nicardipine on colonic motility in irritable bowel syndrome.
Intravenous nicardipine has previously been shown to abolish the effect of a 1000-calorie meal on colonic motility. The purpose of this study was to use the same experimental design to assess the effect of nicardipine instilled directly into the colon. Each patient was studied three times when receiving either placebo, 15 mg or 30 mg nicardipine infused over 2 h. Blood concentrations of nicardipine remained very low, but neither dose of the drug affected either basal or post-prandial colonic motility. Topical nicardipine does not appear to have therapeutic potential and its activity is probably dependent on systemic absorption.
-------------------------------------

10017922_234 - 0.774385323665 - science
[fibronectin, depleted-o2, environment, ecm, degradation, fold, protein, aggregation, d2o, uv]

Predicting the differential susceptibility of dermal extracellular matrix proteins to photodegradation by solar-simulated radiation
Bioscience, University Sydney, AUPhotoaged skin is characterised by profound remodelling of the extracellular matrix (ECM). We have previously shown that UV chromophore (Cys, His, Phe, Trp and Tyr)-rich proteins are differentially degraded by UV radiation (UVR). We tested the hypothesises that; (i) UV-mediated ECM degradation occurs via reactive oxygen species (ROS), by exposing chromophore-rich fibronectin and chromophore-poor tropoelastin to UVR in depleted-O2 and D2O environments and (ii) exogenous ROS mediates differential degradation of the same proteins. As the photodynamic production of ROS can be inhibited in depleted-O2 environments we exposed purified fibronectin to a broadband UVB (TL-12: 50 and 500mJ/cm2) in ambient and depleted-O2 conditions by bubbling with N2. Solutions were analysed by reducing SDS-PAGE. Irradiation of fibronectin in ambient-O2 (50 and 500mJ/cm2) caused dose-dependent aggregation (5 and 83 fold changes in the optical density (OD) of the aggregate at 50 and 500mJ/cm2 respectively), fibronectin aggregation was abrogated (68 fold lower OD) in the depleted-O2 compared with ambient-O2. Conversely, fibronectin aggregation was increased 4 fold in D2O compared with H2O environments. UV-mediated changes to the molecular weight (Mw) of fibronectin were recapitulated by exposure to H2O2 (40mM for 2 hrs). In contrast, UVB irradiation in both H2O and D2O had no observable effect on the Mw of tropoelastin. Therefore, ROS may play an important role in the selective degradation of long-lived UV chromophore-rich ECM in both UV-exposed and protected ageing tissues. Research supported by Alliance Boots.
-------------------------------------

10017139_234 - 0.703393347008 - science
[coating, hybrid, anti-corrosion]

Surface Treatment for New Engineered Aerospace Systems
During this EngD project, two pigmented, anti-corrosion polymer/sol-gel hybrid coatings were developed with the aim of producing an eco-friendly alternative to conventional, toxic hexavalent chromate conversion and anodized anti-corrosion alloy treatments for the aircraft manufacturer; Airbus S.A.S. The polymer/sol-gel hybrid coatings were then tested and validated as anti-corrosion coatings on the AA2024-T3 aluminium aerospace alloy and in certain cases, their performance was compared against that of the hexavalent chromate benchmark (Alocrom 1200). The mechanisms of corrosion inhibition exhibited by the coatings were also studied in depth. The polymer/sol-gel hybrid coatings that were developed in this project are silane based and the first, designated as B2, has polyester-methacrylic functionality and the second, designated as CA/MM, has polyester-amide functionality. Certain inhibitor compounds which were incorporated in the polymer/sol-gel hybrid coatings were chosen by the split-cell technique. The microstructure and elemental compositions of the polymer/sol-gel hybrid coatings and of the AA2024-T3 aluminium alloy were determined by Scanning Electron Microscopy - Energy Dispersive X-ray Spectroscopic (SEM-EDS) analysis of the specimens. The anti-corrosion performance and the corrosion protection mechanisms of the polymer/sol-gel hybrid coatings were determined by salt-water and electrochemical testing of the coated alloy specimens. The thermal resistance of the polymer/sol-gel hybrid coatings was ascertained by thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) of the coatings. The polymer/sol-gel hybrid coatings were also analysed by Fourier Transform Infrared (FTIR), Micro-Raman and X-ray Photoelectron (XPS) spectroscopic techniques to determine whether the desired polymer and silane coating networks formed during coating processing. Anti-corrosion performance test results revealed that both polymer/sol-gel hybrid coatings are self-healing due to their ability to implement a precipitation mechanism of corrosion inhibition. Analysis of the polymer/sol-gel hybrid coatings by X-ray Diffraction (XRD) and X-ray Fluorescence (XRF) after salt-water exposure suggested that the B2 coating precipitated the compound tungsten pyrophosphate, W(P2O7), within defects and that the CA/MM coating precipitated the compound iron carbide, Fe2C, within defects. However, anti-corrosion test results also shown that the anti-corrosion performance of the polymer/sol-gel hybrid coatings does not satisfy aerospace industry requirements. Therefore, it can be concluded that although the achievements of this project have not enabled Airbus to eliminate toxic chromium (VI) species from their operations, further optimisation of the polymer/sol-gel hybrid coatings developed during this project could potentially lead to a solution being found.
-------------------------------------

10003183_234 - 0.909643414971 - science
[gag, surface, protein, amine, allyl, heparin, microtiter, binding, array]

Development of a microtiter plate-based glycosaminoglycan array for the investigation of glycosaminoglycan-protein interactions.
The interactions of glycosaminoglycans (GAGs) with proteins underlie a wide range of important biological processes. However, the study of such binding reactions has been hampered by the lack of a simple frontline analysis technique. Previously, we have reported that cold plasma polymerization can be used to coat microtiter plate surfaces with allyl amine to which GAGs (e.g., heparin) can be noncovalently immobilized retaining their ability to interact with proteins. Here, we have assessed the capabilities of surface coats derived from different ratios of allyl amine and octadiene (100:0 to 0:100) to support the binding of diverse GAGs (e.g., chondroitin-4-sulfate, dermatan sulfate, heparin preparations, and hyaluronan) in a functionally active state. The Link module from TSG-6 was used as a probe to determine the level of functional binding because of its broad (and unique) specificity for both sulfated and nonsulfated GAGs. All of the GAGs tested could bind this domain following their immobilization, although there were clear differences in their protein-binding activities depending on the surface chemistry to which they were adsorbed. On the basis of these experiments, 100% allyl amine was chosen for the generation of a microtiter plate-based "sugar array"; X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy revealed that similar relative amounts of chondroitin-4-sulfate, dermatan sulfate, and heparin (including two selectively de-sulfated derivatives) were immobilized onto this surface. Analysis of four unrelated proteins (i.e., TSG-6, complement factor H, fibrillin-1, and versican) illustrated the utility of this array to determine the GAG-binding profile and specificity for a particular target protein.
-------------------------------------

10004061_234 - 0.80034376056 - science
[parcellation, functional, cortical, human, structural, tractography, diffusion, cortex, region, method]

Connectivity-based structural and functional parcellation of the human cortex using diffusion imaging and tractography
The parcellation of the cortex via its anatomical properties has been an important research endeavor for over a century. To date, however, a universally accepted parcellation scheme for the human brain still remains elusive. In the current review, we explore the use of in vivo diffusion imaging and white matter tractography as a non-invasive method for the structural and functional parcellation of the human cerebral cortex, discussing the strengths and limitations of the current approaches. Cortical parcellation via white matter connectivity is based on the premise that, as connectional anatomy determines functional organization, it should be possible to segregate functionally-distinct cortical regions by identifying similarities and differences in connectivity profiles. Recent studies have provided initial evidence in support of the efficacy of this connectional parcellation methodology. Such investigations have identified distinct cortical subregions which correlate strongly with functional regions identified via fMRI and meta-analyses. Furthermore, a strong parallel between the cortical regions defined via tractographic and more traditional cytoarchitectonic parcellation methods has been observed. However, the degree of correspondence and relative functional importance of cytoarchitectonic- versus connectivity-derived parcellations still remains unclear. Diffusion tractography remains one of the only methods capable of visualizing the structural networks of the brain in vivo. As such, it is of vital importance to continue to improve the accuracy of the methodology and to extend its potential applications in the study of cognition in neurological health and disease.
-------------------------------------

10003655_234 - 0.957758658305 - medicine
[stroke, patient, carer, month, discharge, hospital, nurse, health, index, support]

Expanding the role of the stroke nurse: a pragmatic clinical trial.
AIMS: This paper reports a study evaluating whether expanding a specialist nursing role to provide outreach education and support to stroke patients and carers after discharge from hospital is effective in promoting recovery. BACKGROUND: Building therapeutic relationships with patients and carers is a key component of the nursing role in stroke rehabilitation, although this is limited by the constraints of service organization. METHODS: A pragmatic randomized controlled trial was undertaken. Patients with a diagnosis of stroke were randomized to receive continued support from a stroke nurse (n = 87) or usual care and follow-up (n = 89) after discharge from hospital. Patients were recruited from two hospitals in the north-west of England from November 1999 to April 2001. Patient dependence (Barthel Index), general health (Nottingham Health Profile), activities of living (Frenchay Activity of Living Index), depression (Beck Depression Inventory) and carer strain (Carer Strain Index) were assessed at 3 and 12 months after stroke. RESULTS: The continued intervention of a stroke nurse after discharge was associated with improved patient perceptions of general health at 12 months (median difference 42.6, P = 0.012), and in particular reduced negative emotional reaction (P = 0.037) and perceived social isolation (P = 0.002). In addition, the intervention reduced carer strain at 3 months (P = 0.045), and reduced deterioration in physical dependence from 3 to 12 months (P = 0.049). CONCLUSION: The provision of continued intervention from a stroke nurse after discharge from hospital, focusing on education and support, has tangible benefits for patients and carers.
-------------------------------------

10018171_234 - 0.797566663469 - science
[bacterium, santoriniensis, nksg1, marine, marinobacter, hydrothermal]

Redox cycling of arsenic by the hydrothermal marine bacterium Marinobacter santoriniensis
Marinobacter santoriniensis NKSG1(T) is a mesophilic, dissimilatory arsenate-reducing and arsenite-oxidizing bacterium isolated from an arsenate-reducing enrichment culture. The inoculum was obtained from arsenic-rich shallow marine hydrothermal sediment from Santorini, Greece, with evidence of arsenic redox cycling. Growth studies demonstrated M. santoriniensis NKSG1(T) is capable of conserving energy from the reduction of arsenate {}As(V) with acetate or lactate as the electron donor, and of oxidizing arsenite {}As(III) heterotrophically with oxygen as the electron acceptor. The oxidation of As(III) coincided with the expression of the aoxB gene encoding for the catalytic molybdopterin subunit of the heterodimeric arsenite oxidase operon, indicating the reaction is enzymatically controlled, and M. santoriniensis NKSG1(T) is a heterotrophic As(III)-oxidizing bacterium. Although it is clear that this organism also performs dissimilatory As(V) reduction, no amplification of the arrA arsenate reductase gene was attained using a range of primers and PCR conditions. Marinobacter santoriniensis NKSG1(T) belongs to a genus of bacteria widely occurring in marine environments, including hydrothermal sediments, and is among the first marine bacteria shown to be capable of either anaerobic As(V) respiration or aerobic As(III) oxidation.
-------------------------------------

10005671_234 - 0.911011267884 - medicine
[fibromyalgia, patient, sicca, complex, ib, ibs]

Increased prevalence of sicca complex and fibromyalgia in patients with irritable bowel syndrome.
OBJECTIVE: As many as 70% of patients with fibromyalgia complain of the symptoms of irritable bowel syndrome (IBS), but there is a clinical impression that IBS patients do not suffer from fibromyalgia as frequently. The sicca complex (dry eyes and mouth) is also commonly observed in fibromyalgia, but its prevalence in IBS has not been evaluated. Our objective was to assess the frequency of fibromyalgia and sicca complex in secondary care patients with IBS. METHODS: Forty-six secondary care patients with IBS and 46 healthy controls were assessed by a rheumatologist for the presence of fibromyalgia and objective evidence of sicca complex (Schirmer and Rose-Bengal tests). Psychological status was also assessed (HAD questionnaire). RESULTS: Thirteen (28%) IBS patients suffered from fibromyalgia, compared with five (11%) controls, a difference of 17% (95% confidence intervals CI, 2-33%). Fifteen (33%) IBS patients versus three (6%) controls had sicca complex, a difference of 27% (95% CI, 11-45%). CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that the prevalence of fibromyalgia in IBS is approximately half that of IBS in fibromyalgia. Furthermore, sicca complex seems to be another complaint that should be added to the list of extracolonic manifestations of IBS. Study of the overlap between functional disorders presenting to different specialties may give new insights into the pathophysiology of these puzzling conditions.
-------------------------------------

10010333_234 - 0.802139971183 - science
[actinomycete, essential, metabolic, enzyme, core, network, species, genome-scale, model, comparative]

Comparative genome-scale metabolic modeling of actinomycetes: The topology of essential core metabolism
Actinomycetes are highly important bacteria. On one hand, some of them cause severe human and plant diseases, on the other hand, many species are known for their ability to produce antibiotics. Here we report the results of a comparative analysis of genome-scale metabolic models of 37 species of actinomycetes. Based on in silico knockouts we generated topological and genomic maps for each organism. Combining the collection of genome-wide models, we constructed a global enzyme association network to identify both a conserved "core network" and an "essential core network" of the entire group. As has been reported for low-degree metabolites in several organisms, low-degree enzymes (in linear pathways) turn out to be generally more essential than high-degree enzymes (in metabolic hubs). ?? 2011 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
-------------------------------------

10005256_234 - 0.716121291586 - science
[injury, muscle, outcome, necrosis, case, revascularisation, patient, functional, intermediate, poor]

Arterial injuries at the elbow carry a high risk of muscle necrosis and warrant urgent revascularisation.
INTRODUCTION: Revascularisation following axial arterial system injury is effective in upper limb salvage but necrosis of muscle, the tissue most sensitive to ischaemia, may still occur. We examined the frequency of necrosis, its related factors and its functional significance. METHODS: The clinical findings and operative management of 13 patients with injuries at the elbow referred to 2 plastic surgical hand surgery units over a 30-month period were reviewed. Good outcome was defined as minimal impairment with return to previous occupation, intermediate outcome as moderate impairment with change in occupation and poor outcome as major functional loss preventing work. RESULTS: Seven patients injured the brachial and six injured both the radial and ulnar arteries. Concomitant injuries were severe with nerve injuries in 11 and muscle damage in 12 patients. Functional outcome was good in four cases, intermediate in four and poor in five. Muscle necrosis developed in four brachial artery injuries. In all four cases, initial successful revascularisation failed post-operatively. Case review revealed delayed recognition in three cases where pain heralded ischaemia but distal skin circulation and pulses were adequate. Of patients with necrosis, three had a poor outcome and one had an intermediate outcome. CONCLUSIONS: The risk of muscle necrosis must be considered when managing these injuries, particularly if initial revascularisation is unsuccessful. Every effort should be made to optimise repair technique and post-operative monitoring. Limb salvage is no longer enough. Fully viable muscle is necessary to restore function and livelihoods.
-------------------------------------

10008495_234 - 0.943987897995 - medicine
[igfbp-2, patient, serum, cancer, tumour, elevated, igf-ii, duke, case, colorectal]

Elevated serum insulin-like growth factor (IGF)-II and IGF binding protein-2 in patients with colorectal cancer
This study explored the relationships of serum insulin-like growth factors, IGF-I and IGF-II, and their binding proteins (IGFBP)-2 and IGFBP-3, with key clinicopathological parameters in 92 patients with colorectal cancer (cases). Comparisons were made with 57 individuals who had a normal colonoscopy (controls). Serial changes were examined in 27 cases. As IGF-related peptides are age- and sex-dependent, absolute concentrations were converted to standard deviation scores (SDS). Mean IGF-II SDS were elevated in Dukes A (n = 12, P&lt; 0.001) and Dukes B (n = 25, P&lt; 0.001) cases compared with controls, but not in advanced disease. Compared with controls, mean IGFBP-2 SDS were significantly elevated in patients with Dukes B (P&lt; 0.001), Dukes C (n = 13, P&lt; 0.001) and advanced disease (n = 42, P&lt; 0.0001), with a significant trend from early to advanced disease (one-way ANOVA, P&lt; 0.001). Furthermore, IGFBP-2 SDS were positively related to tumour size (P = 0.01) and fell significantly in patients following curative resection (P = 0.04), suggesting that circulating levels reflect tumour load. We tested the potential tumour marker characteristics of IGFBP-2 SDS against three endpoints: metastasis alone; local pelvic recurrence alone; and metastasis and recurrence combined. The sensitivities for IGFBP-2 alone (&gt;/= + 2SD) were modest at 55%, 46%, and 52%, but in combination with CEA, increased substantially to 90%, 77% and 86%, respectively. We conclude that the serum IGF-II and IGFBP-2 profiles may provide insights into underlying biological mechanisms, and that serum IGFBP-2 may have an adjunct role in cancer surveillance in patients with colorectal cancer.
-------------------------------------

10009434_234 - 0.833149660482 - science
[fluorescence, fluoride, fluorosis, different, photographic, imaging, water, technique, score, software]

Dental fluorosis in populations from Chiang Mai, Thailand with different fluoride exposures - Paper 2: The ability of fluorescence imaging to detect differences in fluorosis prevalence and severity for different fluoride intakes from water
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: To assess the ability of fluorescence imaging to detect a dose response relationship between fluorosis severity and different levels of fluoride in water supplies compared to remote photographic scoring in selected populations participating in an observational, epidemiological survey in Chiang Mai, Thailand. METHODS: Subjects were male and female lifetime residents aged 8-13 years. For each child the fluoride content of cooking water samples (CWS) was assessed to create categorical intervals of water fluoride concentration. Fluorescence images were taken of the maxillary central incisors and analyzed for dental fluorosis using two different software techniques. Output metrics for the fluorescence imaging techniques were compared to TF scores from blinded photographic scores obtained from the survey. RESULTS: Data from 553 subjects were available. Both software analysis techniques demonstrated significant correlations with the photographic scores. The metrics for area effected by fluorosis and the overall fluorescence loss had the strongest association with the photographic TF score (Spearman's rho 0.664 and 0.652 respectively). Both software techniques performed well for comparison of repeat fluorescence images with ICC values of 0.95 and 0.85 respectively. CONCLUSIONS: This study supports the potential use of fluorescence imaging for the objective quantification of dental fluorosis. Fluorescence imaging was able to discriminate between populations with different fluoride exposures on a comparable level to remote photographic scoring with acceptable levels of repeatability.
-------------------------------------

10017137_234 - 0.75025739922 - science
[weld, residual, stress, fracture, pipe, toughness, field, narrow-gap, material]

Residual stress effects on the fracture toughness behaviour of a narrow-gap austenitic stainless steel pipe weld
Automated narrow-gap girth-butt welds are replacing conventional welding methods to join sections of austenitic stainless steel pipe in the primary circuit of Pressurised Water Reactors, to reduce manufacturing costs and improve quality. To ensure the safe operation of these systems, reliable structural integrity assessments have to be undertaken, requiring the mechanical properties of welded joints to be characterised alongside the weld residual stress magnitude and distribution.This research project characterised, for the first time, the weld residual stress field and the tensile and ductile fracture toughness properties of a 33 mm thick narrow-gap 304L stainless steel pipe weld. The residual stress was characterised using two complementary approaches: deep hole drilling and neutron diffraction. A novel neutron diffraction scanning technique was developed to characterise the residual stress field, without cutting an access window into the component, leaving the original weld residual stress field undisturbed. A modified deep hole drilling technique was developed to characterise the residual stress retained in fracture mechanics specimens extracted from the pipe weld in two orientations. The modified technique was shown to measure the original weld residual stress field more accurately than through conventional deep hole drilling. Residual stresses, exceeding 50% of the weld material proof strength, were retained in axially-orientated fracture mechanics specimens.Tensile tests showed that the weld was approximately 60% overmatched. It was demonstrated that neither retained residual stress, nor specimen orientation, had a discernible effect on the measured fracture toughness of the weld material. In less ductile materials, however, the level of retained residual stress may unduly influence the measurement of fracture toughness. At initiation, the fracture toughness properties of both the parent and weld materials were far in excess of the measuring capacity of the largest fracture mechanics specimens that could be machined from the weld.The influence of residual stress and fracture toughness on the performance of narrow-gap welded pipework was investigated. Full elastic-plastic finite element analyses were used to model the pipe weld, containing a postulated defect under combined primary and secondary loading. The results, applied within the framework of an R6 structural integrity assessment, compared different plasticity interaction parameters on the prediction of failure load; the conventional ρ-parameter approach was compared with the recently developed, more advanced, g-parameter. It was shown that the g-parameter significantly reduced the conservatism of the ρ-parameter approach. However, for this pipe weld, plastic collapse was predicted to precede failure by ductile initiation, suggesting that a plastic collapse solution may be an appropriate failure criterion to use in structural integrity assessments of similar component and defect combinations.
-------------------------------------

10008711_234 - 0.865412290255 - science
[ctc, epithelial, cell, iset, patient, nsclc, cellsearch, tumor, marker]

Analysis of circulating tumor cells in patients with non-small cell lung cancer using epithelial marker-dependent and -independent approaches.
INTRODUCTION: Epithelial circulating tumor cells (CTCs) are detectable in patients with non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). However, epithelial to mesenchymal transition, a widely reported prerequisite for metastasis, may lead to an underestimation of CTC number. We compared directly an epithelial marker-dependent (CellSearch) and a marker-independent (isolation by size of epithelial tumor cells ISET) technology platform for the ability to identify CTCs. Molecular characteristics of CTCs were also explored. METHODS: Paired peripheral blood samples were collected from 40 chemonäive, stages IIIA to IV NSCLC patients. CTCs were enumerated by Epithelial Cell Adhesion Molecule-based immunomagnetic capture (CellSearch, Veridex) and by filtration (ISET, RareCell Diagnostics). CTCs isolated by filtration were assessed by immunohistochemistry for epithelial marker expression (cytokeratins, Epithelial Cell Adhesion Molecule, epidermal growth factor receptor) and for proliferation status (Ki67). RESULTS: CTCs were detected using ISET in 32 of 40 (80%) patients compared with 9 of 40 (23%) patients using CellSearch. A subpopulation of CTCs isolated by ISET did not express epithelial markers. Circulating tumor microemboli (CTM, clusters of ≥ 3 CTCs) were observed in 43% patients using ISET but were undetectable by CellSearch. Up to 62% of single CTCs were positive for the proliferation marker Ki67, whereas cells within CTM were nonproliferative. CONCLUSIONS: Both technology platforms detected NSCLC CTCs. ISET detected higher numbers of CTCs including epithelial marker negative tumor cells. ISET also isolated CTM and permitted molecular characterization. Combined with our previous CellSearch data confirming CTC number as an independent prognostic biomarker for NSCLC, we propose that this complementary dual technology approach to CTC analysis allows more complete exploration of CTCs in patients with NSCLC.
-------------------------------------

10009160_234 - 0.772745517825 - technology_and_computing
[nonlinear, method, datum, subspace, linear, dimensionality, set, performance]

On nonlinear dimensionality reduction for face recognition
The curse of dimensionality has prompted intensive research in effective methods of mapping high dimensional data. Dimensionality reduction and subspace learning have been studied extensively and widely applied to feature extraction and pattern representation in image and vision applications. Although PCA has long been regarded as a simple, efficient linear subspace technique, many nonlinear methods such as kernel PCA, local linear embedding, and self-organizing networks have been proposed recently for dealing with increasingly complex nonlinear data. The intensive research in nonlinear methods often creates an impression that they are highly superior and preferred, though often limited experiments were given and the results not tested on significance. In this paper, we systematically investigate and compare the capabilities of various linearand nonlinear subspace methods for face representation and recognition. The performances of these methods are analyzed and discussed along with statistical significance tests on obtained results. The experiments on a range of data sets show that nonlinear methods do not always outperform linear ones, especiallyon data sets containing noise and outliers or having discontinuous or multiple submanifolds. Certain nonlinear methods with certain classifiers do yield better performances consistently than others. However, the differences among them are small and in most cases are not significant. A measure is used to quantify thenonlinearity of a data set in a subspace. It explains that good performances are achievable in reduced dimensions of low degree of nonlinearity.
-------------------------------------

10005284_234 - 0.926968879356 - science
[keloid, ft-ir, tissue, microspectroscopy, section]

Phenotypic profiling of keloid scars using FT-IR microspectroscopy reveals a unique spectral signature.
Keloid disease (KD) is a quasineoplastic fibroproliferative tumour of unknown origin causing a progressive, recurrent dermal lesion. KD is not homogeneous in nature and shows phenotypic structural differences between its distinct peripheral margins compared to its centre. The keloid margin is often symptomatically more active with increased dermal cellularity, compared to a symptomatically dormant and hypocellular centre of lesion. The aim of this study was to delineate the morphological components of a keloid scar tissue by measuring the differences between various anatomical locations within the keloid tissue, such as the margin and the centre of the lesion compared to its surrounding normal skin using Fourier transform infrared (FT-IR) microspectroscopy. FT-IR microspectroscopy is a technique that produces spectra with detailed molecular biochemical information inherent of the chemical structure. Chemical maps were constructed on extralesional cross sections taken from six keloid scars. H&E stained sections were used to confirm diagnosis of keloid and orientate the experimental cross sections prior to FT-IR. Spectral band assignment and principal components analysis were conducted. Distinct vibrational bands (100 spectra) were observed using FT-IR spectroscopy. Partial least squares discriminant analysis, with bootstrapping (10,000 analyses), identified whether a spectrum was from the keloid or normal tissue showing an average accuracy of 84.8%, precision of 80.4%, specificity of 76.2%, and sensitivity of 92.9%. FT-IR microspectroscopy showed significant differences in spectral profiles in keloid tissue in different anatomical locations within the cross section. We believe that this proof-of-concept study may help substantiate the use of FTIR spectroscopy in keloid diagnosis and prognosis.
-------------------------------------

10011645_234 - 0.802591764578 - science
[plasmid, secondary, linear, chromosome, genome, genetic, bacterium, metabolite]

The sequence of a 1.8-Mb bacterial linear plasmid reveals a rich evolutionary reservoir of secondary metabolic pathways
Plasmids are mobile genetic elements that play a key role in the evolution of bacteria by mediating genome plasticity and lateral transfer of useful genetic information. Although originally considered to be exclusively circular, linear plasmids have also been identified in certain bacterial phyla, notably the actinomycetes. In some cases, linear plasmids engage with chromosomes in an intricate evolutionary interplay, facilitating the emergence of new genome configurations by transfer and recombination or plasmid integration. Genome sequencing of Streptomyces clavuligerus {ATCC} 27064, a Gram-positive soil bacterium known for its production ofadiverse arrayofbiotechnologically important secondary metabolites, revealedagiantlinear plasmidof1.8 Mb in length. This megaplasmid {(pSCL4)isone} ofthe largest plasmids ever identified and the largest linear plasmidto be sequenced. It contains more than 20\% of the putative protein-coding genes of the species, but none of these is predicted to be essential for primary metabolism. Instead, the plasmidis densely packed with anexceptionally large numberofgene clusters for the potential production of secondary metabolites, including a large number of putative antibiotics, such as staurosporine, moenomycin, ??-lactams, and enediynes. Interestingly, cross-regulation occurs between chromosomal and plasmid-encoded genes. Several factors suggest that the megaplasmid came into existence through recombination of a smaller plasmid with the arms of the main chromosome. Phylogenetic analysis indicates that heavy traffic of genetic information between Streptomyces plasmids and chromosomes may facilitate the rapid evolution of secondary metabolite repertoires in these bacteria. ?? The Author(s) 2010.
-------------------------------------

10005586_234 - 0.70458194455 - medicine
[bowel, irritable]

Exclusion diets in irritable bowel syndrome: are they worthwhile?
Forty patients with irritable bowel syndrome received an antigen-exclusion diet identical to that previously reported to be highly effective in this condition. Only 15% of the group as a whole showed evidence of food intolerance manifested by an improvement in their irritable bowel symptoms. In a further 12.5% only well-being improved and this did not seem to be related to the exclusion of any particular food. Patients whose bowel dysfunction was characterized by diarrhea responded the best (3/8) whereas those with constipation consistently failed to improve.
-------------------------------------

10010305_234 - 0.737611432867 - science
[eqtl, cell, expression, gene, genomic, type, genetical]

Expression quantitative trait loci are highly sensitive to cellular differentiation state
Genetical genomics is a strategy for mapping gene expression variation to expression quantitative trait loci (eQTLs). We performed a genetical genomics experiment in four functionally distinct but developmentally closely related hematopoietic cell populations isolated from the BXD panel of recombinant inbred mouse strains. This analysis allowed us to analyze eQTL robustness/sensitivity across different cellular differentiation states. Although we identified a large number (365) of "static" eQTLs that were consistently active in all four cell types, we found a much larger number (1,283) of "dynamic" eQTLs showing cell-type-dependence. Of these, 140, 45, 531, and 295 were preferentially active in stem, progenitor, erythroid, and myeloid cells, respectively. A detailed investigation of those dynamic eQTLs showed that in many cases the eQTL specificity was associated with expression changes in the target gene. We found no evidence for target genes that were regulated by distinct eQTLs in different cell types, suggesting that large-scale changes within functional regulatory networks are uncommon. Our results demonstrate that heritable differences in gene expression are highly sensitive to the developmental stage of the cell population under study. Therefore, future genetical genomics studies should aim at studying multiple welldefined and highly purified cell types in order to construct as comprehensive a picture of the changing functional regulatory relationships as possible. ?? 2009 Gerrits et al.
-------------------------------------

10008424_234 - 0.755281380217 - science
[opticin, mouse, wild-type, vitreous, vascular, model, eye]

The vitreous glycoprotein opticin inhibits preretinal neovascularization.
PURPOSE: Opticin is an extracellular matrix glycoprotein that the authors discovered in the vitreous humor of the eye. It is synthesized by the nonpigmented ciliary epithelium and secreted into the vitreous cavity and, unusually for an extracellular matrix molecule, high-level synthesis is maintained into adult life. Here the authors investigated the hypothesis that opticin influences vascular development in the posterior segment of the eye and pathologic angiogenesis into the normally avascular, mature (secondary) vitreous. METHODS: Opticin was localized in murine eyes by immunohistochemistry. An opticin knockout mouse was established and vascular development was compared between knockout and wild-type mice. Wild-type and opticin null mice were compared in the oxygen-induced retinopathy model, a model of pathologic angiogenesis, and this model was also used to assess the effects of intravitreal injection of recombinant opticin into eyes of wild-type mice. RESULTS: Opticin colocalizes with the collagen type II-rich fibrillar network of the vitreous, the inner limiting lamina, the lens capsule, the trabecular meshwork, and the iris. Analyses of the hyaloid and retinal vasculature showed that opticin has no effect on hyaloid vascular regression or developmental retinal vascularization. However, using the oxygen-induced retinopathy model, the authors demonstrated that opticin knockout mice produce significantly more preretinal neovascularization than wild-type mice, and the intravitreal delivery of excess opticin inhibited the formation of neovessels in wild-type mice. CONCLUSIONS: A lack of opticin does not influence vascular development, but opticin is antiangiogenic and inhibits preretinal neovascularization.
-------------------------------------

10005500_234 - 0.834310426968 - medicine
[intervention, trial, walking, patient, behaviour, care, self-regulation, primary, practice, arm]

A cluster randomised controlled trial of the efficacy of a brief walking intervention delivered in primary care: study protocol.
BACKGROUND: The aim of the present research is to conduct a fully powered explanatory trial to evaluate the efficacy of a brief self-regulation intervention to increase walking. The intervention will be delivered in primary care by practice nurses (PNs) and Healthcare Assistants (HCAs) to patients for whom increasing physical activity is a particular priority. The intervention has previously demonstrated efficacy with a volunteer population, and subsequently went through an iterative process of refinement in primary care, to maximise acceptability to both providers and recipients. METHODS/ DESIGN: This two arm cluster randomised controlled trial set in UK general practices will compare two strategies for increasing walking, assessed by pedometer, over six months. Patients attending practices randomised to the self-regulation intervention arm will receive an intervention consisting of behaviour change techniques designed to increase walking self-efficacy (confidence in ability to perform the behaviour), and to help people translate their "good" intentions into behaviour change by making plans. Patients attending practices randomised to the information provision arm will receive written materials promoting walking, and a short unstructured discussion about increasing their walking.The trial will recruit 20 PN/HCAs (10 per arm), who will be trained by the research team to deliver the self-regulation intervention or information provision control intervention, to 400 patients registered at their practices (20 patients per PN/HCA). This will provide 85% power to detect a mean difference of five minutes/day walking between the self-regulation intervention group and the information provision control group. Secondary outcomes include health services costs, and intervention effects in sub-groups defined by age, ethnicity, gender, socio-economic status, and clinical condition. A mediation analysis will investigate the extent to which changes in constructs specified by the Theory of Planned Behaviour lead to changes in objectively assessed walking behaviour. DISCUSSION: This trial addresses the current lack of evidence for interventions that are effective at increasing walking and that can be offered to patients in primary care. The intervention being evaluated has demonstrated efficacy, and has been through an extensive process of adaptation to ensure acceptability to both provider and recipient, thus optimising fidelity of intervention delivery and treatment receipt. It therefore provides a strong test of the hypothesis that a self-regulation intervention can help primary care patients increase their walking. TRIAL REGISTRATION: Current Controlled Trials ISRCTN95932902.
-------------------------------------

10016872_234 - 0.740158930695 - technology_and_computing
[calibration]

Calibration of the cloud particle imager probes using calibration beads and ice crystal analogs: The depth of field
Connolly, Paul J. Flynn, Michael J. Ulanowski, Z. Choularton, T. W. Gallagher, M. W. Bower, K. N.
-------------------------------------

10007187_234 - 0.721442890445 - technology_and_computing
[communication, architecture, processor, neural, spinnaker, scalable]

Scalable communications for a million-core neural processing architecture
The design of a new high-performance computing platform to model biological neural networks requires scalable, layered communications in both hardware and software. SpiNNaker’s hardware is based upon Multi-Processor System-on-Chips (MPSoCs) with flexible, power-efficient, custom communication between processors and chips. The architecture scales from a single 18-processor chip to over 1 million processors and to simulations of billion-neuron, trillion-synapse models, with tens of trillions of neural spike-event packets conveyed each second. The communication networks and overlying protocols are key to the successful operation of the SpiNNaker architecture, designed together to maximise performance and minimise the power demands of the platform. SpiNNaker is a work in progress, having recently reached a major milestone with the delivery of the first MPSoCs. This paper presents the architectural justification, which is now supported by preliminary measured results of silicon performance, indicating that it is indeed scalable to a million-plus processor system.
-------------------------------------

10009934_234 - 0.786311505131 - science
[parametrization, cloud, convective, water, content, frontal, ice]

A parametrization of the ice water content observed in frontal and convective clouds
Part B
-------------------------------------

10010922_234 - 0.784959771982 - medicine
[mutation, retinal, lrat, patient, severe, dystrophy, visual, novel, onset, gene]

Early onset retinal dystrophy due to mutations in LRAT: molecular analysis and detailed phenotypic study.
PURPOSE: To report novel variants and characterize the phenotype associated with the autosomal recessive retinal dystrophy caused by mutations in the lecithin retinol acyltransferase (LRAT) gene. METHODS: A total of 149 patients with Leber's congenital amaurosis (LCA) or early onset retinal dystrophy were screened for mutations in LCA-associated genes using an arrayed-primer extension (APEX) genotyping microarray (Asper Ophthalmics). LRAT sequencing was subsequently performed in this 148-patient panel. Patients identified with mutations underwent further detailed phenotyping. RESULTS: APEX analysis identified one patient with a previously reported homozygous LRAT mutation. Sequencing of the panel identified three additional patients with novel homozygous LRAT mutations in exon 2. All four patients had severe progressive nyctalopia, visual field constriction, and photophilia in childhood. Visual acuity ranged from 0.22 logMAR to hand motion. Funduscopy revealed severe retinal pigment epithelial atrophy and minimal retinal pigmentation. Asteroid hyalosis and macular epiretinal fibrosis were frequent. All demonstrated reduced fundus autofluorescence. Optical coherence tomography identified disrupted retinal lamination, outer-retinal debris, and an unidentifiable photoreceptor layer in two cases. Full-field electroretinograms were undetectable or showed severe rod-cone dysfunction. Photopic perimetry revealed severe visual field constriction. Dark-adapted perimetry demonstrated markedly reduced photoreceptor sensitivity. Dark-adapted spectral sensitivity measurements identified functioning rods in two of three patients. All three had severely reduced L- and M-cone sensitivity and poor color discrimination. CONCLUSIONS: LRAT mutations cause a severe, early childhood onset, progressive retinal dystrophy. Phenotypic similarities to the retinal dysfunction associated with RPE-specific protein 65 kDa mutations, another visual cycle gene, suggest that LRAT deficiency may show a good response to novel therapies.
-------------------------------------

10003325_234 - 0.716324317248 - medicine
[patient, control, ib, synesthesium, sensory, reproducibility]

Synesthesia, pseudo-synesthesia, and irritable bowel syndrome.
BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Synesthesia is a sensory disorder where the stimulation of one sensory modality can lead to a reaction in another which would not usually be expected to respond; for instance, someone might see a color on hearing a word such as a day of the week. Disordered perception of sensory information also appears to contribute to the pathophysiology of irritable bowel syndrome (IBS). The purpose of this exploratory study was to ascertain whether these two conditions might be linked in any way. METHODS: Two hundred consecutive IBS outpatients were screened for synesthesia and compared with 200 matched healthy volunteers (controls). Positive responders were tested for two types of synesthesia (grapheme-color and music-color/shape) using a questionnaire which was repeated after 3 months to test for reproducibility. RESULTS: Of the 200 IBS outpatients screened, 26 (13%) patients and six (3%) controls claimed to be synesthetic (P < 0.001). Reproducibility was more variable in IBS patients than controls but despite this variability, 15 (7.5%) patients compared with 5 (2.5%) controls had greater than 75% consistency (P = 0.036), and 19 (9.5%) patients and 6 (3%) controls had greater than 50% consistency (P = 0.012). A reproducibility of less than 50% was observed in seven (3.5%) patients and no controls (0%) (P = 0.015), and these individuals were classified as having pseudo-synesthesia. CONCLUSION: IBS patients clearly differ from controls in terms of claiming to have synesthetic experiences. These results justify additional studies on the relationship between IBS and synesthesia to further understand the neural mechanisms underpinning these two conditions and to establish whether they may be linked.
-------------------------------------

10005571_234 - 0.911623032089 - medicine
[symptom, syndrome, patient]

Symptoms of irritable bowel syndrome in ulcerative colitis in remission.
The prevalence of symptoms suggestive of a motility disturbance similar to the irritable bowel syndrome was investigated in 98 patients with ulcerative colitis in remission, and a similar number of age- and sex-matched healthy controls. Thirty-three per cent of patients compared with 7% of controls fulfilled the criteria for such a syndrome (p<0.01). Contrary to expectations these symptoms were not confined to patients with distal disease. Other symptoms such as constipation were also very common in the colitic group (31%).
-------------------------------------

10006994_234 - 0.849396462799 - science
[mixture, flavonoid, analysis, nmr, similarity, method, dosy]

Flavonoid Mixture Analysis by Matrix-Assisted Diffusion-Ordered Spectroscopy
The structural similarity of flavonoids, often present in natural product mixtures, makes their analysis by NMR methods less than straightforward. This similarity is a dual problem for one of the most powerful NMR methods for mixture analysis, diffusion-ordered spectroscopy (DOSY), which relies both on well-resolved peaks and on differences in hydrodynamic radii for separating the signals from different components in a mixture. To overcome these limitations, we use a matrix-assisted DOSY approach that exploits differential chemical interactions with a slow diffusion matrix (here micellar sodium dodecyl sulfate) to resolve flavonoid mixtures in mixed solvents.The structural similarity of flavonoids, often present in natural product mixtures, makes their analysis by NMR methods less than straightforward. This similarity is a dual problem for one of the most powerful NMR methods for mixture analysis, diffusion-ordered spectroscopy (DOSY), which relies both on well-resolved peaks and on differences in hydrodynamic radii for separating the signals from different components in a mixture. To overcome these limitations, we use a matrix-assisted DOSY approach that exploits differential chemical interactions with a slow diffusion matrix (here micellar sodium dodecyl sulfate) to resolve flavonoid mixtures in mixed solvents.
-------------------------------------

10008367_234 - 0.791250769946 - science
[graphite, reactor, radiation, study, ion]

Transmission Electron Microscopy Study of Graphite under in situ Ion Irradiation
Graphite is employed as a moderator and structural component in 18 of the United Kingdom’s fleet of  Magnox and Advanced Gas-cooled Reactors (AGRs). During the operational lifetime of a reactor, graphite undergoes complex physical and mechanical property changes including dimensional modification, owing to the effects of temperature, oxidation and irradiation-induced atomic displacements. In order to safely extend the lifetime of the current fleet of AGRs, and also to develop materials for GenIV concepts such as the Very-HighTemperature Reactor (VHTR), it is important to gain a better understanding of the fundamental atomic processes which underpin the behaviour of graphite under current and future operational conditions. This study has focused on the effects of temperature and displacing radiation on the evolution of Mrozowski cracks in highly-orientated pyrolytic graphite (HOPG) using the new Microscope and Ion Accelerator for Materials Investigations (MIAMI) facility. This instrument allows transmission electron microscopy to be performed  in situ whilst simultaneously ion irradiating to radiation damage levels typically reached in a reactor. By using this technique, it is possible to explore the development of radiation damage under a range of different conditions continuously from start-to-finish rather than just observing the end-states accessible in ex situ studies.
-------------------------------------

10004278_234 - 0.873981227466 - science
[higgs, boson, si-2hdm, gev, mass, scale]

Radiative Corrections to Scalar Masses and Mixing in a Scale Invariant Two Higgs Doublet Model
We study the Higgs boson mass spectrum of a classical scale invariant realization of the two Higgs doublet model (SI-2HDM). The classical scale symmetry of the theory is explicitly broken by quantum loop effects due to gauge interactions, Higgs self-couplings and top quark Yukawa couplings. We determine the allowed parameter space compatible with perturbative unitarity and electroweak precision data. Taking into account the LEP and the recent LHC exclusion limits on a standard-model-like Higgs boson HSM, we obtain rather strict constraints on the mass spectrum of the heavy Higgs sector of the SI-2HDM. In particular, if MHSM 125 GeV, the SI-2HDM strongly favors scenarios in which at least one of the nonstandard neutral Higgs bosons has a mass close to 400 GeV and is generically degenerate with the charged Higgs boson, whilst the third neutral Higgs scalar is lighter than 500 GeV.
-------------------------------------

10008352_234 - 0.781314225412 - science
[gtf2ird1, mouse, abnormality, coordination, motor, deletion, behavioral, syndrome, deficit, gene]

Anxious, hypoactive phenotype combined with motor deficits in Gtf2ird1 null mouse model relevant to Williams syndrome.
Williams-Beuren syndrome (WBS) is a rare genetic disorder caused by a hemizygous deletion of around 28 genes on the long arm of chromosome 7 (7q11.23), characterized by a unique spectrum of behavioral impairments, including mental retardation, deficits in visuospatial constructive cognition, hypersociability, anxiety and simple phobias. Physical characteristics include dysmorphic faces, short stature, oculomotor deficits, gross and fine coordination impairments, diminished control of balance and mild extrapyramidal signs as well as gait abnormalities resembling gait hypokinesia. Genes near the distal deletion breakpoint appear to contribute most to the WBS cognitive and behavioral profile and include the GTF family of transcription factors: GTF2I, GTF2IRD1, GTF2IRD2. We have previously shown that heterozygous deletions of GTF2IRD1 in humans and homozygous deletion in mice contributes to craniofacial abnormalities. Here we show an important role of this gene in motor coordination and anxiety ascertained from extensive behavioral mouse phenotyping. Gtf2ird1 null mice showed lower body weight, decreased spontaneous and circadian locomotor activity, diminished motor coordination and strength, gait abnormalities, increased anxiety and an elevated endocrinological response to stress. Gtf2ird1 heterozygous mice displayed lower body weight and decreased circadian activity, but only minor motor coordination and anxiety-related behavioral dysfunctions. Our study strongly supports a role for GTF2IRD1 in the motoric and anxiety-related abnormalities seen in Williams-Beuren syndrome, and suggests basal ganglia and potentially cerebellar abnormalities in Gtf2ird1 mice.
-------------------------------------

10017524_234 - 0.772457356493 - science
[3-dimensional, ethylene, resin, simple, scaffold, method, production, poly, suitable, glycol]

Fabrication of 3-Dimensional Cellular Constructs via Microstereolithography using a Simple, Three Component, Poly(Ethylene Glycol) Acrylate-Based System.
A novel method for the production of inhibitor- and solvent-free resins suitable for 3-dimensional microstereolithography is reported. Using an exemplar poly(ethylene glycol)-based resin, the control of features in the X, Y and Z planes is demonstrated such that complex structures can be manufactured. Human mesenchymal stem cells cultured on the manufactured scaffolds remained viable during the 7 day assessment period, with proliferation rates comparable to those observed on tissue culture polystyrene. These data suggest that this novel, yet simple method, is suitable for the production of 3-dimensional scaffolds for tissue engineering and regenerative medicine applications.
-------------------------------------

10009736_234 - 0.808221947833 - science
[moisture, exposure, fungal, sinusitis, patient, sample, nasal, finding, chronic, study]

Does the triad of fungi, bacteria and exposure to moisture have an impact on chronic hyperplastic sinusitis?
Here we evaluated a possible relationship between chronic hyperplastic sinusitis (CHS) and moisture exposure and secondly a seasonal variation of fungal and bacterial findings in the healthy nose. In 28 CHS patients sinus mucus was collected during endoscopic sinus surgery. Samples from the nasal cavities of 19 healthy volunteers were collected by nasal lavage (NAL) in January and in September. Bacterial culture and fungal staining and culture were carried out. Histological samples from the sinus mucosa were obtained. Patients' medical history and environmental factors were enquired. Mold odor or moisture problems in the home or work environment were reported by 46% of the CHS patients. Patients who reported moisture exposure did not differ significantly from those who had not been exposed with regards to microbiological findings, tissue eosinophilia, and earlier operations. Cladosporium (16%) and Alternaria (11%) were found in NAL fluid collected in the autumn from the control subjects. No fungi were isolated from samples taken during the winter. An association between CHS or fungal sinusitis and moisture damage was not apparent in the present study. The fungal findings in the nasal cavity reflect the environmental exposure. This should be taken into account when NAL is used for microbiological studies. PRACTICAL IMPLICATIONS: Living in a moldy house or working in a similar environment may increase the risk of respiratory symptoms and infections. However, our results suggest that chronic hyperplastic sinusitis and fungal sinusitis are not associated with moisture exposure. The nose is a good collector of particles in the air. Especially samples taken by the nasal lavage method reflect the environmental exposure. This should be taken into account when this method is used for microbiological studies.
-------------------------------------

10009962_234 - 0.944333499025 - science
[albican, phagocyte, phagocytosis, electron, monolayer, mouse, microscopy]

Ultrastructural features of phagocytosis and intracellular killing of Candida albicans by mouse polymorphonuclear phagocyte monolayers.
Phagocyte monolayers provided a simple method of following ultrastructural events associated with phagocytosis and intracellular killing of Candida albicans. Preformed monolayers of mouse polymorphonuclear (PMN) phagocytes attached to glass coverslips were incubated with blastospore phase C. albicans and then examined by scanning and transmission electron microscopy. Scanning electron microscopy revealed phagocytosis of C. albicans by mouse phagocytes. Ingestion of the organism was facilitated by the production of lamellipodia by the phagocytes. Transmission electron microscopy revealed complete phagocytosis of C. albicans and the fusion of lysosomal granules with loose and tight phagosomes. Ingested C. albicans remained structurally intact after 2 hr incubation in blastospore-free medium. However, cytoplasmic alterations were clearly evident, with a patchy loss of electron density. Alterations of the blastospore cell wall were also observed, with complete disruption of the plasma membrane but the wall remaining morphologically intact.
-------------------------------------

10008395_234 - 0.827292497329 - medicine
[surgery]

Classification of and cytoreductive surgery for low-grade appendiceal mucinous neoplasms
McDonald, J R O'Dwyer, S T Rout, S Chakrabarty, B Sikand, K Fulford, P E Wilson, M S Renehan, A G Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't England The British journal of surgery Br J Surg. 2012 Jul;99(7):987-92. doi: 10.1002/bjs.8739. Epub 2012 Apr 20.
-------------------------------------

10009821_234 - 0.715735207561 - science
[fungus, fungal, infection, host, tissue]

Opportunistic and pathogenic fungi.
The number of fungal species reported to cause disease in man is increasing rapidly. Very few of these fungi are capable of infecting a normal host. Important progress has been achieved in an understanding of fungal pathogenicity including the mechanisms of adherence to host tissues, penetration of tissues, multiplication within the host, and the interaction of fungal cells with host effector cells. In addition to the increase in infections by opportunistic and pathogenic fungi in compromised patients, caused by Candida spp., Aspergillus spp., Cryptococcus neoformans, Histoplasma capsulatum and Coccidioides immitis, many fungi that occur as saprophytes in the environment and which had previously been considered to be nonpathogenic are now being encountered as causes of human infection. The advent of these unusual infections has led to reappraisal of the diagnostic tests involved in the investigation of fungal infections and has had important implications for the choice of treatment. Many of these fungi have a similar tissue appearance and the organisms must be isolated and identified to ensure that the most appropriate treatment is given.
-------------------------------------

10006966_234 - 0.851728493078 - science
[cell, cardiomyocyte, differentiation, humsc, sheet, culturing, s1p]

Sphingosine-1-phosphate promotes the differentiation of human umbilical cord mesenchymal stem cells into cardiomyocytes under the designated culturing conditions.
BACKGROUND: It is of growing interest to develop novel approaches to initiate differentiation of mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) into cardiomyocytes. The purpose of this investigation was to determine if Sphingosine-1-phosphate (S1P), a native circulating bioactive lipid metabolite, plays a role in differentiation of human umbilical cord mesenchymal stem cells (HUMSCs) into cardiomyocytes. We also developed an engineered cell sheet from these HUMSCs derived cardiomyocytes by using a temperature-responsive polymer, poly(N-isopropylacrylamide) (PIPAAm) cell sheet technology. METHODS: Cardiomyogenic differentiation of HUMSCs was performed by culturing these cells with either designated cardiomyocytes conditioned medium (CMCM) alone, or with 1 μM S1P; or DMEM with 10% FBS + 1 μM S1P. Cardiomyogenic differentiation was determined by immunocytochemical analysis of expression of cardiomyocyte markers and patch clamping recording of the action potential. RESULTS: A cardiomyocyte-like morphology and the expression of α-actinin and myosin heavy chain (MHC) proteins can be observed in both CMCM culturing or CMCM+S1P culturing groups after 5 days' culturing, however, only the cells in CMCM+S1P culture condition present cardiomyocyte-like action potential and voltage gated currents. A new approach was used to form PIPAAm based temperature-responsive culture surfaces and this successfully produced cell sheets from HUMSCs derived cardiomyocytes. CONCLUSIONS: This study for the first time demonstrates that S1P potentiates differentiation of HUMSCs towards functional cardiomyocytes under the designated culture conditions. Our engineered cell sheets may provide a potential for clinically applicable myocardial tissues should promote cardiac tissue engineering research.
-------------------------------------

10004176_234 - 0.826155998717 - science
[benzoic, pressure, vapour, acid]

The role of ortho, meta, para isomerism in measured solid state and derived sub-cooled liquid vapour pressures of substituted benzoic acids
Knudsen Effusion Mass Spectrometry (KEMS) has been used to measure solid state equilibrium vapour pressures of several multifunctional aromatic compounds; phthalic, isophthalic, terephthalic, para-anisic, ortho-amino benzoic, meta-amino benzoic, para-amino benzoic, vanillic, syringic, 1,2,4-tricarboxylic benzoic, 3,5-dihydroxy-4-methyl benzoic and 4-methyl phthalic acids and nitrocatechol. Sub-cooled liquid vapour pressures were derived using Differential Scanning Calorimetry (DSC) measured thermochemical properties for the compounds measured here, as well as for other substituted benzoic acids using literature values. Unusual trends in the sub-cooled liquid vapour pressure, not represented by currently available vapour pressure estimation methods, are explained using a newly constructed Structure-Activity Relationship (SAR) with a combination of resonance and steric effects. This was then tested against further measurements of ortho-dimethyl amino benzoic and meta-dimethyl amino benzoic acids.
-------------------------------------

10009362_234 - 0.803378018265 - medicine
[treatment, infection, rct, risk, canal, abscess, patient, dental, maxillofacial, spread]

The role of unfinished root canal treatment in odontogenic maxillofacial infections requiring hospital care.
OBJECTIVES: The aim of this study was to evaluate clinical and radiological findings and the role of periapical infection and antecedent dental treatment of infected focus teeth in odontogenic maxillofacial abscesses requiring hospital care. MATERIALS AND METHODS: In this retrospective cohort study, we evaluated medical records and panoramic radiographs during the hospital stay of patients (n = 60) admitted due to odontogenic maxillofacial infection originating from periapical periodontitis. RESULTS: Twenty-three (38 %) patients had received endodontic treatment and ten (17 %) other acute dental treatment. Twenty-seven (45 %) had not visited the dentist in the near past. Median age of the patients was 45 (range 20-88) years and 60 % were males. Unfinished root canal treatment (RCT) was the major risk factor for hospitalisation in 16 (27 %) of the 60 cases (p = .0065). Completed RCT was the source only in 7 (12 %) of the 60 cases. Two of these RCTs were adequate and five inadequate. CONCLUSIONS: The initiation of inadequate or incomplete primary RCT of acute periapical periodontitis appears to open a risk window for locally invasive spread of infection with local abscess formation and systemic symptoms. Thereafter, the quality of the completed RCT appears to have minor impact. However, a considerable proportion of the patients had not received any dental treatment confirming the importance of good dental health. Thus, thorough canal debridement during the first session is essential for minimising the risk for spread of infection in addition to incision and drainage of the abscess. If this cannot be achieved, tooth extraction should be considered. CLINICAL RELEVANCE: Incomplete or inadequate canal debridement and drainage of the abscess may increase the risk for spread of endodontic infection.
-------------------------------------

10017091_234 - 0.892234873363 - science
[elastic, radiation, fibrillin, ecm, uv, protein, component, matrix, skin]

Low-dose ultraviolet radiation selectively degrades chromophore-rich extracellular matrix components.
Photoageing of human skin due to chronic exposure to ultraviolet radiation (UVR) is characterized histologically by extensive remodelling of the dermal elastic fibre system. Whilst enzymatic pathways are thought to play a major role in mediating extracellular matrix (ECM) degeneration in UV-exposed skin, the substrate specificity of UVR-up-regulated and activated matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) is low. It is unclear, therefore, how such cell-mediated mechanisms alone could be responsible for the reported selective degradation of elastic fibre components such as fibrillin-1 and fibulin-5 during the early stages of photoageing. Here we use atomic force microscopy (AFM) and scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) to demonstrate that physiologically attainable doses (20-100 mJ/cm(2)) of direct UV-B radiation can induce profound, dose-dependent, changes in the structure of, and mass distribution within, isolated fibrillin microfibrils. Furthermore, using reducing and native PAGE in combination with AFM, we show that, whilst exposure to low-dose UV-B radiation significantly alters the macromolecular and quaternary structures of both UV chromophore (Cys, His, Phe, Trp and Tyr)-rich fibrillin microfibrils (fibrillin-1, 21.0%) and fibronectin dimers (fibronectin, 12.9%), similar doses have no detectable effect on UV chromophore-poor type I collagen monomers (2.2%). Analysis of the published primary amino acid sequences of 49 dermal ECM components demonstrates that most elastic fibre-associated proteins, but crucially neither elastin nor members of the collagen family, are rich in UV chromophores. We suggest, therefore, that the amino acid composition of elastic fibre-associated proteins including the fibrillins, fibulins, latent TGFbeta binding proteins (LTBPs) and the lysyl oxidase family of enzymes (LOK/LOXLs) may predispose them to direct degradation by UVR. As a consequence, this selective acellular photochemical pathway may play an important role in initiating and/or exacerbating cell-mediated ECM remodelling in UVR-exposed skin.
-------------------------------------

10011802_234 - 0.741261705123 - science
[times, left-side, similarity, human, difference, ape, cradling]

LEFT-SIDE CRADLING - SIMILARITIES AND DIFFERENCES BETWEEN APES AND HUMANS
Times Cited: 16
-------------------------------------

10011845_234 - 0.721249864631 - finance
[wealth, subprime, lending, accumulation, single, woman, di, debt]

Home is Where The Hardship is. Gender and Wealth (Dis)Accumulation in the Subprime Boom
Subprime lending has become the penultimate case study for critics of the recent period of financialization, or neo-liberalism more broadly, because it exposes the most profligate tendencies of predatory lending and the pernicious social costs visited on society's most vulnerable groups. This article builds on the social stratification and wealth accumulation literature. We assess how mounting debt levels and crippling costs of servicing these debts compared to relatively flat income growth for female-headed households have resulted in wealth (dis)accumulation. We use the Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF) to analyze how single female-headed households, and in particular how African American single mothers were affected by the subprime boom in different, arguably more pernicious, ways. There is already considerable evidence showing that subprime lending was disproportionally sold to women, particularly minority women. Focusing on single mothers reveals important gender and racial dimensions of the lending techniques, but it also shows how marginalized families increasingly relied on housing wealth (equity) to adjust to shrinking purchasing power. Thus, contrary to the lofty expectations of the ownership society, the high mortgage debts of many low-income women suggest they own a lesser share of their homes – (dis)accumulation of wealth – than at any previous time.
-------------------------------------

10008024_234 - 0.883699927193 - science
[hamamatsu, surface, engn]

Surface elemental segregation and the Stranski-Krastanow epitaxial islanding transition
Times Cited: 12 12th International Conference on Solid Films and Surfaces (ICSFS-12) JUN 21-25, 2004 Hamamatsu, JAPAN Suzuki Motor Corp; Murata Sci Fdn; Shizuoka Univ Fund Engn Res; Promotion Elect Engn Hamamatsu; Hamamatsu Visitors & Convent Bur
-------------------------------------

10005113_234 - 0.905871345913 - science
[mitochondrial, human, trh, hormone]

Thyrotropin-releasing hormone controls mitochondrial biology in human epidermis.
CONTEXT: Mitochondrial capacity and metabolic potential are under the control of hormones, such as thyroid hormones. The most proximal regulator of the hypothalamic-pituitary-thyroid (HPT) axis, TRH, is the key hypothalamic integrator of energy metabolism via its impact on thyroid hormone secretion. OBJECTIVE: Here, we asked whether TRH directly modulates mitochondrial functions in normal, TRH-receptor-positive human epidermis. METHODS: Organ-cultured human skin was treated with TRH (5-100 ng/ml) for 12-48 h. RESULTS: TRH significantly increased epidermal immunoreactivity for the mitochondria-selective subunit I of respiratory chain complex IV (MTCO1). This resulted from an increased MTCO1 transcription and protein synthesis and a stimulation of mitochondrial biogenesis as demonstrated by transmission electron microscopy and TRH-enhanced mitochondrial DNA synthesis. TRH also significantly stimulated the transcription of several other mitochondrial key genes (TFAM, HSP60, and BMAL1), including the master regulator of mitochondrial biogenesis (PGC-1α). TRH significantly enhanced mitochondrial complex I and IV enzyme activity and enhanced the oxygen consumption of human skin samples, which shows that the stimulated mitochondria are fully vital because the main source for cellular oxygen consumption is mitochondrial endoxidation. CONCLUSIONS: These findings identify TRH as a potent, novel neuroendocrine stimulator of mitochondrial activity and biogenesis in human epidermal keratinocytes in situ. Thus, human epidermis offers an excellent model for dissecting neuroendocrine controls of human mitochondrial biology under physiologically relevant conditions and for exploring corresponding clinical applications.
-------------------------------------

10004909_234 - 0.768559258722 - science
[patient, tissue, technique, cochrane, review, soft, trial, implant, mucosa, dental]

Soft tissue management for dental implants: what are the most effective techniques? A Cochrane systematic review.
This review is based on a Cochrane systematic review entitled 'Interventions for replacing missing teeth: management of soft tissues for dental implants' published in The Cochrane Library (see http:// www.cochrane.org/ for information). Cochrane systematic reviews are regularly updated to include new research, and in response to comments and criticisms from readers. If you wish to comment on this review, please send your comments to the Cochrane website or to Marco Esposito. The Cochrane Library should be consulted for the most recent version of the review. The results of a Cochrane review can be interpreted differently, depending on people's perspectives and circumstances. Please consider the conclusions presented carefully. They are the opinions of the review authors, and are not necessarily shared by the Cochrane Collaboration. Purpose: To evaluate whether flapless procedures are beneficial for patients and which is the ideal flap design, whether soft tissue correction/augmentation techniques are beneficial for patients and which are the best techniques, whether techniques to increase the peri-implant keratinised mucosa are beneficial for patients and which are the best techniques, and which are the best suturing techniques/ materials. Materials and methods: The Cochrane Oral Health Group's Trials Register, CENTRAL, MEDLINE and EMBASE were searched up to the 9th of June 2011 for randomised controlled trials (RCTs) of rootform osseointegrated dental implants, with a follow-up of at least 6 months after function, comparing various techniques to handle soft tissues in relation to dental implants. Primary outcome measures were prosthetic failures, implant failures and biological complications. Screening of eligible studies, assessment of the methodological quality of the trials and data extraction were conducted at least in duplicate and independently by two or more review authors. The statistical unit was the patient and not the prosthesis, the procedure or the implant. Results were expressed using risk ratios for dichotomous outcomes and mean differences for continuous outcomes with 95% confidence intervals (CI). Results: Seventeen potentially eligible RCTs were identified but only six trials with 138 patients in total could be included. The following techniques were compared in the six included studies: flapless placement of dental implants versus conventional flap elevation (2 trials, 56 patients), crestal versus vestibular incisions (1 trial, 10 patients), Erbium:YAG laser versus flap elevation at the second-stage surgery for implant exposure (1 trial, 20 patients), whether a connective tissue graft at implant placement could be effective in augmenting peri-implant tissues (1 split-mouth trial, 10 patients), and autograft versus an animal-derived collagen matrix to increase the height of the keratinised mucosa (1 trial, 40 patients). On a patient rather than per implant basis, implants placed with a flapless technique and implant exposures performed with laser lead to statistically significantly less postoperative pain than flap elevation. Sites augmented with soft tissue connective grafts had better aesthetics and thicker tissues. Both palatal autografts or the use of a porcine-derived collagen matrix are effective in increasing the height of keratinised mucosa at the cost of a 0.5 mm recession of peri-implant soft tissues. There were no other statistically significant differences for any of the remaining analyses. Conclusions: There is limited weak evidence suggesting that flapless implant placement is feasible and has been shown to reduce patient postoperative discomfort in adequately selected patients, that augmentation at implant sites with soft tissue grafts is effective in increasing soft tissue thickness and improving aesthetics, and that one technique to increase the height of keratinised mucosa using autografts or an animal-derived collagen matrix was able to achieve its goal but at the cost of a worsened aesthetic outcome (0.5 mm of recession). There is insufficient reliable evidence to provide recommendations on which is the ideal flap design, the best soft tissue augmentation technique, whether techniques to increase the width of keratinised/attached mucosa are beneficial to patients or not, and which are the best incision/suture techniques/materials. Properly designed and conducted RCTs, with at least 6 months of follow-up, are needed to provide reliable answers to these questions.
-------------------------------------

10004707_234 - 0.927676020976 - science
[genome, cyanobacterial, gene, plastid, alignment, plant, cyanobacterium, ancestor]

Genes of cyanobacterial origin in plant nuclear genomes point to a heterocyst-forming plastid ancestor.
Plastids are descended from a cyanobacterial symbiosis which occurred over 1.2 billion years ago. During the course of endosymbiosis, most genes were lost from the cyanobacterium's genome and many were relocated to the host nucleus through endosymbiotic gene transfer (EGT). The issue of how many genes were acquired through EGT in different plant lineages is unresolved. Here, we report the genome-wide frequency of gene acquisitions from cyanobacteria in 4 photosynthetic eukaryotes-Arabidopsis, rice, Chlamydomonas, and the red alga Cyanidioschyzon-by comparison of the 83,138 proteins encoded in their genomes with 851,607 proteins encoded in 9 sequenced cyanobacterial genomes, 215 other reference prokaryotic genomes, and 13 reference eukaryotic genomes. The analyses entail 11,569 phylogenies inferred with both maximum likelihood and Neighbor-Joining approaches. Because each phylogenetic result is dependent not only upon the reconstruction method but also upon the site patterns in the underlying alignment, we investigated how the reliability of site pattern generation via alignment affects our results: if the site patterns in an alignment differ depending upon the order in which amino acids are introduced into multiple sequence alignment-N- to C-terminal versus C- to N-terminal-then the phylogenetic result is likely to be artifactual. Excluding unreliable alignments by this means, we obtain a conservative estimate, wherein about 14\% of the proteins examined in each plant genome indicate a cyanobacterial origin for the corresponding nuclear gene, with higher proportions (17-25\%) observed among the more reliable alignments. The identification of cyanobacterial genes in plant genomes affords access to an important question: from which type of cyanobacterium did the ancestor of plastids arise? Among the 9 cyanobacterial genomes sampled, Nostoc sp. PCC7120 and Anabaena variabilis ATCC29143 were found to harbor collections of genes which are-in terms of presence/absence and sequence similarity-more like those possessed by the plastid ancestor than those of the other 7 cyanobacterial genomes sampled here. This suggests that the ancestor of plastids might have been an organism more similar to filamentous, heterocyst-forming (nitrogen-fixing) representatives of section IV recognized in Stanier's cyanobacterial classification. Members of section IV are very common partners in contemporary symbiotic associations involving endosymbiotic cyanobacteria, which generally provide nitrogen to their host, consistent with suggestions that fixed nitrogen supplied by the endosymbiont might have played an important role during the origin of plastids.
-------------------------------------

10008669_234 - 0.850281758845 - medicine
[olaparib, patient, bevacizumab, combination]

Phase I study to assess the safety and tolerability of olaparib in combination with bevacizumab in patients with advanced solid tumours.
BACKGROUND: Olaparib (AZD2281) is a potent oral poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase inhibitor with anti-tumour activity and acceptable toxicity as monotherapy in patients with BRCA-deficient cancers. The vascular endothelial growth factor receptor inhibitor bevacizumab has been incorporated into standard of care with chemotherapy in various tumours. This phase I study established the safety, tolerability and clinical pharmacokinetics of olaparib alone and in combination with bevacizumab. METHODS: Patients with advanced solid tumours received increasing doses of continuous oral olaparib (100, 200 and 400 mg b.i.d. capsule formulation) in combination with bevacizumab (10 mg kg(-1) intravenous q2w). RESULTS: In all, 12 patients enrolled and received treatment. The most common adverse events (AEs) related to olaparib were grade 1/2 nausea and fatigue. No haematological parameters were reported as AEs. No serious AEs related to olaparib or dose-limiting toxicities (DLTs) were reported. Three patients discontinued due to AEs, two patients discontinued both olaparib and bevacizumab and one patient discontinued olaparib. Five patients received combination treatment for over 6 months. There was no evidence that bevacizumab affected olaparib. CONCLUSION: The combination of olaparib 400 mg b.i.d. with bevacizumab 10 mg kg(-1) q2w was generally well tolerated with no DLTs. This combination could be considered for future clinical investigation.
-------------------------------------

10011215_234 - 0.848130803545 - science
[complexity, neurodegenerative, silico, emergence, disease, times, cited, reconstruction]

Understanding complexity in neurodegenerative diseases: in silico reconstruction of emergence
Times Cited: 0
-------------------------------------

10016816_234 - 0.860919046337 - science
[gene, cluster, cpkc, synthase, pk]

A cryptic type I polyketide synthase (cpk) gene cluster in Streptomyces coelicolor A3(2)
The chromosome of Streptomyces coelicolor A3(2), a model organism for the genus Streptomyces, contains a cryptic type I polyketide synthase (PKS) gene cluster which was revealed when the genome was sequenced. The ca. 54-kb cluster contains three large genes, cpkA, cpkB and cpkC, encoding the PKS subunits. In silico analysis showed that the synthase consists of a loading module, five extension modules and a unique reductase as a terminal domain instead of a typical thioesterase. All acyltransferase domains are specific for a malonyl extender, and have a B-type ketoreductase. Tailoring and regulatory genes were also identified within the gene cluster. Surprisingly, some genes show high similarity to primary metabolite genes not commonly identified in any antibiotic biosynthesis cluster. Using western blot analysis with a PKS subunit (CpkC) antibody, CpkC was shown to be expressed in S. coelicolor at transition phase. Disruption of cpkC gave no obvious phenotype. ?? 2006 Springer-Verlag.
-------------------------------------

10018302_234 - 0.729485975438 - medicine
[infection, respiratory]

Respiratory infections: do we ever recover?
Although the outcome of respiratory infection alters with age, nutritional status, and immunologic competence, there is a growing body of evidence that we all develop a unique but subtle inflammatory profile. This uniqueness is determined by the sequence of infections or antigenic insults encountered that permanently mold our lungs through experience. This experience and learning process forms the basis of immunologic memory that is attributed to the acquired immune system. But what happens if the pathogen is not homologous to any preceding it? In the absence of cross-specific acquired immunity, one would expect a response similar to that of a subject who had never been infected with anything before. It is now clear that this is not the case. Prior inflammation in the respiratory tract alters immunity and pathology to subsequent infections even when they are antigenically distinct. Furthermore, the influence of the first infection is long lasting, not dependent on the presence of T and B cells, and effective against disparate pathogen combinations. We have used the term "innate imprinting" to explain this phenomenon, although innate education may be a closer description. This educational process, by sequential waves of infection, may be beneficial, as shown for successive viral infections, or significantly worse, as illustrated by the increased susceptibly to life-threatening bacterial pneumonia in patients infected with seasonal and pandemic influenza. We now examine what these long-term changes involve, the likely cell populations affected, and what this means to those studying inflammatory disorders in the lung.
-------------------------------------

10005686_234 - 0.920240149012 - medicine
[abatacept, long-term, treatment, clinical, rheumatoid, therapy, response, drug, progression, arthritis]

Abatacept in the long-term treatment of rheumatoid arthritis.
The last decade has been an era of exciting and innovative therapeutic targets in the treatment of moderate-to-severe rheumatoid arthritis. One such treatment that acts by disrupting T-cell activation is abatacept, which is currently used in patients who have had an inadequate clinical response to traditional disease-modifying drugs or anti-TNF therapies. As newer therapies emerge, issues that need addressing include: long-term drug tolerance, adverse events, sustained clinical response, prevention of progression in structural damage and retention rates. In this article we discuss a recently published paper by Kremer et al. that reported 3-year data on safety, efficacy and radiographic progression in patients enrolled in a clinical trial of abatacept, as well as the advantages and limitations of long-term extension studies.
-------------------------------------

10011671_234 - 0.867718997333 - science
[particle, separation, separator, filter, barrier, engine]

A Comparative Study of Helicopter Engine Air Particle Separator Technologies
An investigation into the efficacy of helicopter engine sand filters is conducted. Engine Air Particle Separation devices are broadly split into three categories: Vortex Tube Separators, Integrated Particle Separators, and Inlet Barrier Filters. The first two are inertial separators that scavenge particles by centrifugal force; the latter traps particles on its surface, but all three are designed with the aim or removing all particles from the engine bound air. Each technology is different, which gives rise to varying levels of efficacy. The current work uses low order analytical and numerical models to explore these differences and introduces a metric for quantifying the quality of air-particle separation performance. The vortex tube separators exhibit a high efficiency and low pressure drop, but require auxiliary power to operate and experience considerable drag at high forward speeds. Inertial particle separators do not achieve the high separation efficiencies of the vortex tubes or barrier filters, but have a large mass flow to frontal area ratio, hence low drag. Inlet barrier filters are highly efficient at removing particles and improve in this over time due to the accumulation of particles, but at the expense of a temporally increasing pressure drop. The new metric is a quality factor that can be used to directly compare separation technologies for helicopter. Its application is demonstrated by the inlet barrier filter which, when clean, is the best performing device, but over time deteriorates in quality due to the accumulation of particles.
-------------------------------------

10010591_234 - 0.951417214675 - science
[synthetic, strategy, biosynthetic, metabolite, biology, secondary, drug, production, system, plug-and-play]

Exploiting plug-and-play synthetic biology for drug discovery and production in microorganisms
One of the most promising applications of synthetic biology is the biosynthesis of new drugs from secondary metabolites. Here, we survey a wide range of strategies that control the activity of biosynthetic modules in the cell in space and time, and illustrate how these strategies can be used to design efficient cellular synthetic production systems. Re-engineered versions of secondary metabolite biosynthetic pathways identified from any genomic sequence can then be inserted into these systems in a plug-and-play fashion. ?? 2011 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved.
-------------------------------------

10003296_234 - 0.708117481817 - technology_and_computing
[design, implementation, methodology, asynchronous, spinnaker, tool, chip, system, complexity]

SpiNNaker: Design and Implementation of a GALS Multicore System-on-Chip
The design and implementation of globally asynchronous locally synchronous systems-on-chip is a challenging activity. The large size and complexity of the systems require the use of computer-aided design (CAD) tools but, unfortunately, most tools do not work adequately with asynchronous circuits. This article describes the successful design and implementation of SpiNNaker, a GALS multicore system-on-chip. The process was completed using commercial CAD tools from synthesis to layout. A hierarchical methodology was devised to deal with the asynchronous sections of the system, encapsulating and validating timing assumptions at each level. The crossbar topology combined with a pipelined asynchronous fabric implementation allows the on-chip network to meet the stringent requirements of the system. The implementation methodology constrains the design in a way that allows the tools to complete their tasks successfully. A first test chip, with reduced resources and complexity was taped-out using the proposed methodology. Test chips were received in December 2009 and were fully functional. The methodology had to be modified to cope with the increased complexity of the SpiNNaker SoC. SpiNNaker chips were delivered in May 2011 and were also fully operational, and the interconnect requirements were met.
-------------------------------------

10007518_234 - 0.841824966625 - medicine
[ctc, patient, nsclc, stage]

Evaluation and prognostic significance of circulating tumor cells in patients with non-small-cell lung cancer.
PURPOSE: Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer-related death worldwide. Non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) lacks validated biomarkers to predict treatment response. This study investigated whether circulating tumor cells (CTCs) are detectable in patients with NSCLC and what their ability might be to provide prognostic information and/or early indication of patient response to conventional therapy. PATIENTS AND METHODS: In this single-center prospective study, blood samples for CTC analysis were obtained from 101 patients with previously untreated, stage III or IV NSCLC both before and after administration of one cycle of standard chemotherapy. CTCs were measured using a semiautomated, epithelial cell adhesion molecule-based immunomagnetic technique. RESULTS: The number of CTCs in 7.5 mL of blood was higher in patients with stage IV NSCLC (n = 60; range, 0 to 146) compared with patients with stage IIIB (n = 27; range, 0 to 3) or IIIA disease (n = 14; no CTCs detected). In univariate analysis, progression-free survival was 6.8 v 2.4 months with P < .001, and overall survival (OS) was 8.1 v 4.3 months with P < .001 for patients with fewer than five CTCs compared with five or more CTCs before chemotherapy, respectively. In multivariate analysis, CTC number was the strongest predictor of OS (hazard ratio HR, 7.92; 95% CI, 2.85 to 22.01; P < .001), and the point estimate of the HR was increased with incorporation of a second CTC sample that was taken after one cycle of chemotherapy (HR, 15.65; 95% CI, 3.63 to 67.53; P < .001). CONCLUSION: CTCs are detectable in patients with stage IV NSCLC and are a novel prognostic factor for this disease. Further validation is warranted before routine clinical application.
-------------------------------------

10009690_234 - 0.922519582578 - medicine
[survival, non-brainstem, patient, hgg]

Outcomes for Non-Brainstem Intracerebral High Grade Gliomas diagnosed in the North West region of England during 1954-2008
Background: Non-Brainstem High-Grade Gliomas (HGGs) comprise approximately 8% of primary brain neoplasms in children. Incidence of HGGs increases with age with an equal male to female ratio.  Patients with HGGs generally present with a very short symptom interval due to their aggressive nature and fast growth rate.Aim: This project aims to identify factors and trends in survival among children with non-brainstem high-grade gliomas in the North-west region between 1954-2008.Method: Patients who had been diagnosed with non-brainstem high-grade gliomas in the North West Region between years 1954-2008 were extracted from the database in the North West Children’s Tumour Registry. Data relating to presentation, management and survival for these patients were analysed.Results:  265 non-brainstem HGG patients were identified.  There was no evidence of improvement in survival over the time period of the study (Log Rank p=0.141).  Age (p=0.788), chemotherapy (p=0.791) and radiotherapy (p=0.189) had no influence on survival.  Extent of resection had a significant influence on survival with children having a total or near total (>90%) resection having a 2.5 times improvement in survival (p<0.001).  The rare giant cell glioblastoma cases appeared to have a more favourable prognosis.Conclusion:Survival over time has clearly not improved among patients with non-brainstem HGGs. Despite efforts to improve prognosis, survival rates at 5 years is still dismal with only marginal improvements over the last few decades.  In this cohort, extent of surgical resection appears to be the most important factor in survival of these patients.
-------------------------------------

10018245_234 - 0.821263232046 - science
[cftr, nherf1, protein, pdz, structure, interaction]

Structural biology of Cystic Fibrosis Transmembrane Conductance Regulator, an ATP-binding cassette protein of medical importance
The cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) is a transmembrane protein that functions as an ion channel. Mutations in this protein cause Cystic Fibrosis. For this reason, it is important to study the structure and function of CFTR. In this study, constructs of CFTR (C-terminii), a CFTR-interacting protein and full-length CFTR were cloned, expressed and purified for structural and functional studies. The purified C-terminal polypeptides of CFTR were soluble and shown to interact with NHERF1 PDZ 1 (a CFTR-interacting protein). The CFTR C-terminus and NHERF1 PDZ 1 domain were co-expressed and co-purified. The purified complex showed a strong interaction that might induce a conformational change. Site-directed mutation of the C-terminus of CFTR was performed in order to examine the effect of removing a potentially flexible amino acid (Arginine) on protein crystallization.Pull-down assay experiments with full-length CFTR demonstrated an interaction between CFTR (in DDM detergent) and NHERF1 PDZ 1(+). No interaction was observed for CFTR in LPG (a relatively denaturing detergent) and NHERF1, implying that the interaction between the PDZ motive of CFTR and NHERF1 requires a stable folded structure for both proteins. In addition, full-length CFTR in DDM has been studied by electron microscopy and Single Particle Analysis in the presence of NHERF1 PDZ 1(+). A 3D structure was generated for the CFTR-NHERF1 PDZ 1(+) complex at a resolution of ~ 18 Å. This 3D structure showed a new open conformation of CFTR (V shape). In comparable studies with CFTR alone, a 3D structure was generated at a resolution of 27 Å and this structure showed a closed state as previously reported. This new data suggest a possible role for NHERF1 in terms of CFTR channel gating or activation.
-------------------------------------

10018288_234 - 0.829276408549 - science
[ikkbeta, macrophage, infection, role, activation, inflammation]

An antiinflammatory role for IKKbeta through the inhibition of "classical" macrophage activation.
The nuclear factor kappaB (NF-kappaB) pathway plays a central role in inflammation and immunity. In response to proinflammatory cytokines and pathogen-associated molecular patterns, NF-kappaB activation is controlled by IkappaB kinase (IKK)beta. Using Cre/lox-mediated gene targeting of IKKbeta, we have uncovered a tissue-specific role for IKKbeta during infection with group B streptococcus. Although deletion of IKKbeta in airway epithelial cells had the predicted effect of inhibiting inflammation and reducing innate immunity, deletion of IKKbeta in the myeloid lineage unexpectedly conferred resistance to infection that was associated with increased expression of interleukin (IL)-12, inducible nitric oxide synthase (NOS2), and major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class II by macrophages. We also describe a previously unknown role for IKKbeta in the inhibition of signal transducer and activator of transcription (Stat)1 signaling in macrophages, which is critical for IL-12, NOS2, and MHC class II expression. These studies suggest that IKKbeta inhibits the "classically" activated or M1 macrophage phenotype during infection through negative cross talk with the Stat1 pathway. This may represent a mechanism to prevent the over-exuberant activation of macrophages during infection and contribute to the resolution of inflammation. This establishes a new role for IKKbeta in the regulation of macrophage activation with important implications in chronic inflammatory disease, infection, and cancer.
-------------------------------------

10003883_234 - 0.966920677706 - medicine
[copd, fev, patient, litre, reversibility, salbutamol, bronchodilator, change]

Bronchodilator responsiveness as a phenotypic characteristic of established chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
BACKGROUND: Bronchodilator responsiveness is a potential phenotypic characteristic of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). We studied whether change in lung function after a bronchodilator is abnormal in COPD, whether stable responder subgroups can be identified, and whether these subgroups experience different clinical outcomes. METHODS: 1831 patients with COPD, 285 smoking (SC) and 228 non-smoking (NSC) controls from the Evaluation of COPD Longitudinally to Identify Predictive Surrogate Endpoints (ECLIPSE) cohort. Spirometric reversibility to 400 μg inhaled salbutamol was assessed on four occasions over 1 year. RESULTS: Forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV(1)) increase after salbutamol was similar in SC (mean 0.14 litres (SD 0.15)) and COPD (0.12 litres (0.15)) and was significantly greater than NSC (0.08 litres (0.14)). Reversibility status varied with repeated testing in parallel with the day-to-day variation in pre-bronchodilator FEV(1), which was similar in control subjects and patients with COPD. Absolute FEV(1) change decreased by Global initiative for chronic Obstructive Lung Disease (GOLD) stage in patients with COPD (GOLD II, mean 0.16 litres (SD 0.17); III, 0.10 litres (0.13); IV, 0.05 litres (0.08) as did chances of being classified as reversible. CT-defined emphysema was weakly related to the absolute change in FEV(1) post salbutamol. Consistently reversible patients (n=227) did not differ in mortality, hospitalisation or exacerbation experience from irreversible patients when allowing for differences in baseline FEV(1). LIMITATIONS: Reversibility only assessed with salbutamol and defined by FEV(1) criteria. The COPD population was older than the control populations. CONCLUSIONS: Post-salbutamol FEV(1) change is similar in patients with COPD and smoking controls but is influenced by baseline lung function and the presence of emphysema. Bronchodilator reversibility status varies temporally and does not distinguish clinically relevant outcomes, making it an unreliable phenotype.
-------------------------------------

10008569_234 - 0.909819230816 - medicine
[response, patient, treatment, amygdalum, emotion, sad, depressed, face, specific, remission]

Increased Amygdala Responses to Sad But Not Fearful Faces in Major Depression: Relation to Mood State and Pharmacological Treatment
OBJECTIVE: Increased amygdala response to negative emotions seen in functional MRI (fMRI) has been proposed as a biomarker for negative emotion processing bias underlying depressive symptoms and vulnerability to depressive relapse that are normalized by antidepressant drug treatment. The purpose of this study was to determine whether abnormal amygdala responses to face emotions in depression are related to specific emotions or change in response to antidepressant treatment and whether they are present as a stable trait in medication-free patients in remission. METHOD: Sixty-two medication-free unipolar depressed patients (38 were currently depressed, and 24 were in remission) and 54 healthy comparison subjects underwent an indirect face-emotion processing task during fMRI. Thirty-two currently depressed patients were treated with the antidepressant citalopram for 8 weeks. Adherence to treatment was evaluated by measuring citalopram plasma concentrations. RESULTS: Patients with current depression had increased bilateral amygdala responses specific to sad faces relative to healthy comparison subjects and nonmedicated patients in stable remission. Treatment with citalopram abolished the abnormal amygdala responses to sad faces in currently depressed patients but did not alter responses to fearful faces. CONCLUSIONS: Aberrant amygdala activation in response to sad facial emotions is specific to the depressed state and is a potential biomarker for a negative affective bias during a depressive episode.
-------------------------------------

10005643_234 - 0.719321893776 - medicine
[system, bowel, irritable, patient, syndrome, score, severity]

The irritable bowel severity scoring system: a simple method of monitoring irritable bowel syndrome and its progress.
BACKGROUND: The clinical assessment and investigation of irritable bowel syndrome would be greatly facilitated by the introduction of a simple, easy to use severity scoring system. Such a system, developed in our department over a number of years, has been submitted to validation in a total of 141 patients and 40 healthy controls. METHODS: The system, incorporating pain, distension, bowel dysfunction and quality of life/global well-being, was assessed for its ability to reliably score patients previously classified as mild, moderate or severe. The reproducibility and sensitivity to change of the system was also assessed. RESULTS: The maximum achievable score was 500. Mild, moderate and severe cases were indicated by scores of 75 to 175, 175 to 300 and > 300 respectively. Controls scored below 75 and patients scoring in this range can be considered to be in remission. There was a highly significant difference between controls and patients as a whole (P = 0.0001) as well as significant differences (P < 0.01) between all severity categories. Scores repeated within 24 h were very reproducible and sensitivity to change was also extremely good (P < 0.001) with a change of 50 reliably indicating improvement. CONCLUSION: These results suggest that this scoring system should prove to be a valuable instrument in helping to meet the many challenges offered by irritable bowel syndrome.
-------------------------------------

10010520_234 - 0.884288559952 - science
[human, tissue, expression, placental, antibody, channel]

Expression of an electrically silent voltage-gated potassium channel in the human placenta.
Human placental expression of K(V)9.3, a voltage-gated K channel linked to tissue oxygenation responses, has been suggested at the messenger RNA level but tissue localisation has not been described. We aimed to: (1) produce an antibody to human K(V)9.3 and (2) assess channel expression and distribution in human placental tissue. We determined human placental protein expression and localisation using an antibody to K(V)9.3. Antibody specificity was confirmed by Western blotting. Staining was observed in syncytiotrophoblast microvillous membrane, endothelial cells (in intermediate, stem villi and chorionic plate blood vessels) and vascular smooth muscle cells (large diameter vessels only) by immunohistochemistry. Expression was unchanged in tissue from women with small-for-gestational age babies. It was concluded that K(V)9.3 is localised to human placental vascular tissues and syncytiotrophoblast.
-------------------------------------

10005600_234 - 0.848133433913 - medicine
[nicardipine, bowel, syndrome, motility, irritable, colonic]

Reduction of colonic motility by intravenous nicardipine in irritable bowel syndrome.
The effect of nicardipine, a new dihydropyridine calcium antagonist, on postprandial colonic motility was assessed in 10 patients with irritable bowel syndrome. Each patient was studied twice receiving intravenously either N saline or nicardipine after a 1000 calorie meal. In the control study there was a significant (p less than 0.01) postprandial increase in the contractile activity of the colon, reaching a peak at approximately 20 minutes. Intravenous nicardipine completely abolished the colonic response, with a significant reduction in the number (p less than 0.005) and amplitude (p less than 0.005) of contractions and of the motility index (p less than 0.025). These results support the need for further studies to evaluate the therapeutic role of nicardipine in the irritable bowel syndrome.
-------------------------------------

100003_102 - 0.747343143625 - technology_and_computing
[tool, design, designerly, interaction]

Designerly Tools
<p>An assumption behind this paper is that research aimed at improving interaction design practice is not as successful as it could be. We will argue that one reason for this is that the understanding of what constitutes designerly tools is not enough recognized among those who propose new tools for interaction design. We define designerly tools as methods, tools, techniques, and approaches that support design activity in way that is appreciated by practicing interaction designers. Based on a two empirical studies, we have developed a framework and a way of studying designers and their tools. We discuss some insights about what characterizes designerly tools and what kind of implications these insights might have for the further development of tools aimed at supporting design practice.
</p>
<p>
<strong>Keywords:</strong> <br /> 
Design, Tools, Interaction Design, Activities, Support For Design</p>
-------------------------------------

10009449_234 - 0.914146794006 - medicine
[murray, patients, clinical, kaiyan, taylor, feng, christopher, raynaud, preliminary, phillip]

Preliminary Clinical Evaluation of Semi-automated Nailfold Capillaroscopy in the Assessment of Patients with Raynaud's Phenomenon
Murray, Andrea K. Feng, Kaiyan Moore, Tonia L. Allen, Phillip D. Taylor, Christopher J. Herrick, Ariane L.
-------------------------------------

10007503_234 - 0.802943895973 - science
[cell, hypoxic, abt-737, apoptosis, tumor, mcl-1, hypoxium]

Hypoxic human cancer cells are sensitized to BH-3 mimetic–induced apoptosis via downregulation of the Bcl-2 protein Mcl-1.
Solid tumors contain hypoxic regions in which cancer cells are often resistant to chemotherapy-induced apoptotic cell death. Therapeutic strategies that specifically target hypoxic cells and promote apoptosis are particularly appealing, as few normal tissues experience hypoxia. We have found that the compound ABT-737, a Bcl-2 homology domain 3 (BH-3) mimetic, promotes apoptotic cell death in human colorectal carcinoma and small cell lung cancer cell lines exposed to hypoxia. This hypoxic induction of apoptosis was mediated through downregulation of myeloid cell leukemia sequence 1 (Mcl-1), a Bcl-2 family protein that serves as a biomarker for ABT-737 resistance. Downregulation of Mcl-1 in hypoxia was independent of hypoxia-inducible factor 1 (HIF-1) activity and was consistent with decreased global protein translation. In addition, ABT-737 induced apoptosis deep within tumor spheroids, consistent with an optimal hypoxic oxygen tension being necessary to promote ABT-737–induced cell death. Tumor xenografts in ABT-737–treated mice also displayed significantly more apoptotic cells within hypoxic regions relative to normoxic regions. Synergies between ABT-737 and other cytotoxic drugs were maintained in hypoxia, suggesting that this drug may be useful in combination with chemotherapeutic agents. Taken together, these findings suggest that Mcl-1–sparing BH-3 mimetics may induce apoptosis in hypoxic tumor cells that are resistant to other chemotherapeutic agents and may have a role in combinatorial chemotherapeutic regimens for treatment of solid tumors.
-------------------------------------

10018373_234 - 0.883656456273 - science
[eosinophilia, virus, protein, mouse, rvv, region, responsible, protective, rsv, lung]

Eliminating a region of respiratory syncytial virus attachment protein allows induction of protective immunity without vaccine-enhanced lung eosinophilia.
In a murine model of respiratory syncytial virus disease, prior sensitization to the attachment glycoprotein (G) leads to pulmonary eosinophilia and enhanced illness. Three different approaches were taken to dissect the region of G responsible for enhanced disease and protection against challenge. First, mutant viruses, containing frameshifts that altered the COOH terminus of the G protein, were used to challenge mice sensitized by scarification with recombinant vaccinia virus (rVV) expressing wild-type G. Second, cDNA expressing these mutated G proteins were expressed by rVV and used to vaccinate mice before challenge with wild-type respiratory syncytial virus (RSV). These studies identified residues 193-205 to be responsible for G-induced weight loss and lung eosinophilia and showed that this region was not was not necessary for induction of protective immunity. Third, mice were sensitized using an rVV that expressed only amino acids 124-203 of the G protein. Upon RSV challenge, mice sensitized with this rVV developed enhanced weight loss and eosinophilia. This is the first time that a region within RSV (amino acids 193-203) has been shown to be responsible for induction of lung eosinophilia and disease enhancement. Moreover, we now show that it is possible to induce protective immunity with an altered G protein without inducing a pathological response.
-------------------------------------

